Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boone, by John Filson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boone

Author: John Filson

Release Date: May, 1997  [Etext #909]
Posting Date: July 9, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF COLONEL BOONE ***




Produced by John M. Krafft









THE ADVENTURES OF COL. DANIEL BOON

CONTAINING A NARRATIVE OF THE WARS OF KENTUCKE

From The Discovery and Settlement of Kentucke


By John Filson


Curiosity is natural to the soul of man, and interesting objects have
a powerful influence on our affections. Let these influencing powers
actuate, by the permission or disposal of Providence, from selfish or
social views, yet in time the mysterious will of Heaven is unfolded,
and we behold our conduct, from whatsoever motives excited, operating to
answer the important designs of heaven. Thus we behold Kentucke, lately
an howling wilderness, the habitation of savages and wild beasts, become
a fruitful field; this region, so favourably distinguished by nature,
now become the habitation of civilization, at a period unparalleled in
history, in the midst of a raging war, and under all the disadvantages
of emigration to a country so remote from the inhabited parts of the
continent. Here, where the hand of violence shed the blood of the
innocent; where the horrid yells of savages, and the groans of the
distressed, sounded in our ears, we now hear the praises and adoration
of our Creator; where wretched wigwams stood, the miserable abodes
of savages, we behold the foundations of cities laid, that, in all
probability, will rival the glory of the greatest upon earth. And we
view Kentucke situated on the fertile banks of the great Ohio, rising
from obscurity to shine with splendor, equal to any other of the stars
of the American hemisphere.

The settling of this region well deserves a place in history. Most
of the memorable events I have myself been exercised in; and, for the
satisfaction of the public, will briefly relate the circumstances of my
adventures, and scenes of life, from my first movement to this country
until this day.

It was on the first of May, in the year 1769, that I resigned my
domestic happiness for a time, and left my family and peaceable
habitation on the Yadkin River, in North-Carolina, to wander through the
wilderness of America, in quest of the country of Kentucke, in company
with John Finley, John Stewart, Joseph Holden, James Monay, and William
Cool. We proceeded successfully, and after a long and fatiguing journey
through a mountainous wilderness, in a westward direction, on the
seventh day of June following, we found ourselves on Red-River, where
John Finley had formerly been trading with the Indians, and, from the
top of an eminence, saw with pleasure the beautiful level of Kentucke.
Here let me observe, that for some time we had experienced the most
uncomfortable weather as a prelibation of our future sufferings. At this
place we encamped, and made a shelter to defend us from the inclement
season, and began to hunt and reconnoitre the country. We found every
where abundance of wild beasts of all sorts, through this vast forest.
The buffaloes were more frequent than I have seen cattle in the
settlements, browzing on the leaves of the cane, or croping the herbage
on those extensive plains, fearless, because ignorant, of the violence
of man. Sometimes we saw hundreds in a drove, and the numbers about the
salt springs were amazing. In this forest, the habitation of beasts of
every kind natural to America, we practised hunting with great success
until the twenty-second day of December following.

This day John Stewart and I had a pleasing ramble, but fortune changed
the scene in the close of it. We had passed through a great forest on
which stood myriads of trees, some gay with blossoms, others rich with
fruits. Nature was here a series of wonders, and a fund of delight. Here
she displayed her ingenuity and industry in a variety of flowers
and fruits, beautifully coloured, elegantly shaped, and charmingly
flavoured; and we were diverted with innumerable animals presenting
themselves perpetually to our view.--In the decline of the day, near
Kentucke river, as we ascended the brow of a small hill, a number of
Indians rushed out of a thick cane-brake upon us, and made us prisoners.
The time of our sorrow was now arrived, and the scene fully opened. The
Indians plundered us of what we had, and kept us in confinement
seven days, treating us with common savage usage. During this time
we discovered no uneasiness or desire to escape, which made them
less suspicious of us; but in the dead of night, as we lay in a thick
cane-brake by a large fire, when sleep had locked up their senses, my
situation not disposing me for rest, I touched my companion and gently
awoke him. We improved this favourable opportunity, and departed,
leaving them to take their rest, and speedily directed our course
towards our old camp, but found it plundered, and the company dispersed
and gone home. About this time my brother, Squire Boon, with another
adventurer, who came to explore the country shortly after us, was
wandering through the forest, determined to find me, if possible, and
accidentally found our camp.

Notwithstanding the unfortunate circumstances of our company, and our
dangerous situation, as surrounded with hostile savages, our meeting
so fortunately in the wilderness made us reciprocally sensible of the
utmost satisfaction. So much does friendship triumph over misfortune,
that sorrows and sufferings vanish at the meeting not only of real
friends, but of the most distant acquaintances, and substitutes
happiness in their room.

Soon after this, my companion in captivity, John Stewart, was killed
by the savages, and the man that came with my brother returned home by
himself. We were then in a dangerous, helpless situation, exposed daily
to perils and death amongst savages and wild beasts, not a white man in
the country but ourselves.

Thus situated, many hundred miles from our families in the howling
wilderness, I believe few would have equally enjoyed the happiness we
experienced. I often observed to my brother, You see now how little
nature requires to be satisfied. Felicity, the companion of content,
is rather found in our own breasts than in the enjoyment of external
things; And I firmly believe it requires but a little philosophy to
make a man happy in whatsoever state he is. This consists in a full
resignation to the will of Providence; and a resigned soul finds
pleasure in a path strewed with briars and thorns.

We continued not in a state of indolence, but hunted every day, and
prepared a little cottage to defend us from the Winter storms. We
remained there undisturbed during the Winter; and on the first day of
May, 1770, my brother returned home to the settlement by himself, for
a new recruit of horses and ammunition, leaving me by myself, without
bread, salt or sugar, without company of my fellow creatures, or even
a horse or dog. I confess I never before was under greater necessity of
exercising philosophy and fortitude. A few days I passed uncomfortably.
The idea of a beloved wife and family, and their anxiety upon the
account of my absence and exposed situation, made sensible impressions
on my heart. A thousand dreadful apprehensions presented themselves
to my view, and had undoubtedly disposed me to melancholy, if further
indulged.

One day I undertook a tour through the country, and the diversity and
beauties of nature I met with in this charming season, expelled every
gloomy and vexatious thought. Just at the close of day the gentle gales
retired, and left the place to the disposal of a profound calm. Not
a breeze shook the most tremulous leaf. I had gained the summit of a
commanding ridge, and, looking round with astonishing delight, beheld
the ample plains, the beauteous tracts below. On the other hand, I
surveyed the famous river Ohio that rolled in silent dignity, marking
the western boundary of Kentucke with inconceivable grandeur. At a
vast distance I beheld the mountains lift their venerable brows, and
penetrate the clouds. All things were still. I kindled a fire near a
fountain of sweet water, and feasted on the loin of a buck, which a few
hours before I had killed. The sullen shades of night soon overspread
the whole hemisphere, and the earth seemed to gasp after the hovering
moisture. My roving excursion this day had fatigued my body, and
diverted my imagination. I laid me down to sleep, and I awoke not until
the sun had chased away the night. I continued this tour, and in a
few days explored a considerable part of the country, each day equally
pleased as the first. I returned again to my old camp, which was not
disturbed in my absence. I did not confine my lodging to it, but often
reposed in thick cane-brakes, to avoid the savages, who, I believe,
often visited my camp, but fortunately for me, in my absence. In this
situation I was constantly exposed to danger, and death. How unhappy
such a situation for a man tormented with fear, which is vain if
no danger comes, and if it does, only augments the pain. It was my
happiness to be destitute of this afflicting passion, with which I had
the greatest reason to be affected. The prowling wolves diverted my
nocturnal hours with perpetual howlings; and the various species of
animals in this vast forest, in the daytime, were continually in my
view.

Thus I was surrounded with plenty in the midst of want. I was happy
in the midst of dangers and inconveniences. In such a diversity it was
impossible I should be disposed to melancholy. No populous city, with
all the varieties of commerce and stately structures, could afford so
much pleasure to my mind, as the beauties of nature I found here.

Thus, through an uninterrupted scene of sylvan pleasures, I spent the
time until the 27th day of July following, when my brother, to my great
felicity, met me, according to appointment, at our old camp. Shortly
after, we left this place, not thinking it safe to stay there longer,
and proceeded to Cumberland river, reconnoitring that part of the
country until March, 1771, and giving names to the different waters.

Soon after, I returned home to my family with a determination to bring
them as soon as possible to live in Kentucke, which I esteemed a second
paradise, at the risk of my life and fortune.

I returned safe to my old habitation, and found my family in happy
circumstances. I sold my farm on the Yadkin, and what goods we could not
carry with us; and on the twenty-fifth day of September, 1773, bade a
farewel to our friends, and proceeded on our journey to Kentucke, in
company with five families more, and forty men that joined us in Powel's
Valley, which is one hundred and fifty miles from the now settled parts
of Kentucke. This promising beginning was soon overcast with a cloud of
adversity; for upon the tenth day of October, the rear of our company
was attacked by a number of Indians, who killed six, and wounded one
man. Of these my eldest son was one that fell in the action. Though
we defended ourselves, and repulsed the enemy, yet this unhappy affair
scattered our cattle, brought us into extreme difficulty, and so
discouraged the whole company, that we retreated forty miles, to the
settlement on Clench river. We had passed over two mountains, viz.
Powel's and Walden's, and were approaching Cumberland mountain when this
adverse fortune overtook us. These mountains are in the wilderness, as
we pass from the old settlements in Virginia to Kentucke, are ranged in
a S. west and N. east direction, are of a great length and breadth, and
not far distant from each other. Over these, nature hath formed passes,
that are less difficult than might be expected from a view of such huge
piles. The aspect of these cliffs is so wild and horrid, that it is
impossible to behold them without terror. The spectator is apt to
imagine that nature had formerly suffered some violent convulsion; and
that these are the dismembered remains of the dreadful shock; the ruins,
not of Persepolis or Palmyra, but of the world!

I remained with my family on Clench until the sixth of June, 1774,
when I and one Michael Stoner were solicited by Governor Dunmore, of
Virginia, to go to the Falls of the Ohio, to conduct into the settlement
a number of surveyors that had been sent thither by him some months
before; this country having about this time drawn the attention of many
adventurers. We immediately complied with the Governor's request, and
conducted in the surveyors, compleating a tour of eight hundred miles,
through many difficulties, in sixty-two days.

Soon after I returned home, I was ordered to take the command of three
garrisons during the campaign, which Governor Dunmore carried on against
the Shawanese Indians: After the conclusion of which, the Militia was
discharged from each garrrison, and I being relieved from my post,
was solicited by a number of North-Carolina gentlemen, that were about
purchasing the lands lying on the S. side of Kentucke River, from the
Cherokee Indians, to attend their treaty at Wataga, in March, 1775, to
negotiate with them, and, mention the boundaries of the purchase. This
I accepted, and at the request of the same gentlemen, undertook to
mark out a road in the best passage from the settlement through the
wilderness to Kentucke, with such assistance as I thought necessary to
employ for such an important undertaking.

I soon began this work, having collected a number of enterprising men,
well armed. We proceeded with all possible expedition until we came
within fifteen miles of where Boonsborough now stands, and where we were
fired upon by a party of Indians that killed two, and wounded two of our
number; yet, although surprised and taken at a disadvantage, we stood
our ground. This was on the twentieth of March, 1775. Three days after,
we were fired upon again, and had two men killed, and three wounded.
Afterwards we proceeded on to Kentucke river without opposition; and on
the first day of April began to erect the fort of Boonsborough at a salt
lick, about sixty yards from the river, on the S. side.

On the fourth day, the Indians killed one of our men.--We were busily
employed in building this fort, until the fourteenth day of June
following, without any farther opposition from the Indians; and having
finished the works, I returned to my family, on Clench.

In a short time, I proceeded to remove my family from Clench to this
garrison; where we arrived safe without any other difficulties than
such as are common to this passage, my wife and daughter being the first
white women that ever stood on the banks of Kentucke river.

On the twenty-fourth day of December following we had one man killed,
and one wounded, by the Indians, who seemed determined to persecute us
for erecting this fortification.

On the fourteenth day of July, 1776, two of Col. Calaway's daughters,
and one of mine, were taken prisoners near the fort. I immediately
pursued the Indians, with only eight men, and on the sixteenth overtook
them, killed two of the party, and recovered the girls. The same day
on which this attempt was made, the Indians divided themselves into
different parties, and attacked several forts, which were shortly before
this time erected, doing a great deal of mischief. This was extremely
distressing to the new settlers. The innocent husbandman was shot down,
while busy cultivating the soil for his family's supply. Most of
the cattle around the stations were destroyed. They continued their
hostilities in this manner until the fifteenth of April, 1777, when
they attacked Boonsborough with a party of above one hundred in number,
killed one man, and wounded four--Their loss in this attack was not
certainly known to us.

On the fourth day of July following, a party of about two hundred
Indians attacked Boonsborough, killed one man, and wounded two. They
besieged us forty-eight hours; during which time seven of them were
killed, and at last, finding themselves not likely to prevail, they
raised the siege, and departed.

The Indians had disposed their warriors in different parties at this
time, and attacked the different garrisons to prevent their assisting
each other, and did much injury to the distressed inhabitants.

On the nineteenth day of this month, Col. Logan's fort was besieged by a
party of about two hundred Indians. During this dreadful siege they did
a great deal of mischief, distressed the garrison, in which were
only fifteen men, killed two, and wounded one. The enemies loss was
uncertain, from the common practice which the Indians have of carrying
off their dead in time of battle. Col. Harrod's fort was then defended
by only sixty-five men, and Boonsborough by twenty-two, there being
no more forts or white men in the country, except at the Falls, a
considerable distance from these, and all taken collectively, were but a
handful to the numerous warriors that were every where dispersed through
the country, intent upon doing all the mischief that savage barbarity
could invent. Thus we passed through a scene of sufferings that exceeds
description.

On the twenty-fifth of this month a reinforcement of forty-five
men arrived from North-Carolina, and about the twentieth of August
following, Col. Bowman arrived with one hundred men from Virginia. Now
we began to strengthen, and from hence, for the space of six weeks, we
had skirmishes with Indians, in one quarter or other, almost every day.

The savages now learned the superiority of the Long Knife, as they call
the Virginians, by experience; being out-generalled in almost every
battle. Our affairs began to wear a new aspect, and the enemy, not
daring to venture on open war, practised secret mischief at times.

On the first day of January, 1778, I went with a party of thirty men
to the Blue Licks, on Licking River, to make salt for the different
garrisons in the country.

On the seventh day of February, as I was hunting, to procure meat for
the company, I met with a party of one hundred and two Indians, and
two Frenchmen, on their march against Boonsborough, that place being
particularly the object of the enemy.

They pursued, and took me; and brought me on the eighth day to the
Licks, where twenty-seven of my party were, three of them having
previously returned home with the salt. I knowing it was impossible for
them to escape, capitulated with the enemy, and, at a distance in their
view, gave notice to my men of their situation, with orders not to
resist, but surrender themselves captives.

The generous usage the Indians had promised before in my capitulation,
was afterwards fully complied with, and we proceeded with them as
prisoners to old Chelicothe, the principal Indian town, on Little
Miami, where we arrived, after an uncomfortable journey, in very
severe weather, on the eighteenth day of February, and received as good
treatment as prisoners could expect from savages.--On the tenth day of
March following, I, and ten of my men, were conducted by forty Indians
to Detroit, where we arrived the thirtieth day, and were treated by
Governor Hamilton, the British commander at that post, with great
humanity.

During our travels, the Indians entertained me well; and their affection
for me was so great, that they utterly refused to leave me there with
the others, although the Governor offered them one hundred pounds
Sterling for me, on purpose to give me a parole to go home. Several
English gentlemen there, being sensible of my adverse fortune, and
touched with human sympathy, generously offered a friendly supply for
my wants, which I refused, with many thanks for their kindness; adding,
that I never expected it would be in my power to recompense such
unmerited generosity.

The Indians left my men in captivity with the British at Detroit, and
on the tenth day of April brought me towards Old Chelicothe, where we
arrived on the twenty-fifth day of the same month. This was a long and
fatiguing march, through an exceeding fertile country, remarkable for
fine springs and streams of water. At Chelicothe I spent my time as
comfortably as I could expect; was adopted, accordin to their custom,
into a family where I became a son, and had a great share in the
affection of my new parents, brothers, sisters, and friends. I was
exceedingly familiar and friendly with them, always appearing as
chearful and satisfied as possible, and they put great confidence in me.
I often went a hunting with them, and frequently gained their applause
for my activity at our shooting-matches. I was careful not to exceed
many of them in shooting; for no people are more envious than they in
this sport. I could observe, in their countenances and gestures, the
greatest expressions of joy when they exceeded me; and, when the reverse
happened, of envy. The Shawanese king took great notice of me,
and treated me with profound respect, and entire friendship, often
entrusting me to hunt at my liberty. I frequently returned with the
spoils of the woods, and as often presented some of what I had taken
to him, expressive of duty to my sovereign. My food and lodging was, in
common, with them, not so good indeed as I could desire, but necessity
made every thing acceptable.

I now began to meditate an escape, and carefully avoided their
suspicions, continuing with them at Old Chelicothe until the first day
of June following, and then was taken by them to the salt springs on
Sciotha, and kept there, making salt, ten days. During this time I
hunted some for them, and found the land, for a great extent about this
river, to exceed the soil of Kentucke, if possible, and remarkably well
watered.

When I returned to Chelicothe, alarmed to see four hundred and fifty
Indians, of their choicest warriors, painted and armed in a fearful
manner, ready to march against Boonsborough, I determined to escape the
first opportunity.

On the sixteenth, before sun-rise, I departed in the most secret manner,
and arrived at Boonsborough on the twentieth, after a journey of one
hundred and sixty miles; during which, I had but one meal.

I found our fortress in a bad state of defence, but we proceeded
immediately to repair our flanks, strengthen our gates and posterns, and
form double bastions, which we compleated in ten days. In this time we
daily expected the arrival of the Indian army; and at length, one of
my fellow prisoners, escaping from them, arrived, informing us that the
enemy had an account of my departure, and postponed their expedition
three weeks.--The Indians had spies out viewing our movements, and were
greatly alarmed with our increase in number and fortifications. The
Grand Councils of the nations were held frequently, and with more
deliberation than usual. They evidently saw the approaching hour when
the Long Knife would disposess them of their desirable habitations; and
anxiously concerned for futurity, determined utterly to extirpate the
whites out of Kentucke. We were not intimidated by their movements, but
frequently gave them proofs of our courage.

About the first of August, I made an incursion into the Indian country,
with a party of nineteen men, in order to surprise a small town up
Sciotha, called Paint-Creek-Town. We advanced within four miles
thereof, where we met a party of thirty Indians, on their march against
Boonsborough, intending to join the others from Chelicothe. A smart
fight ensued betwixt us for some time: At length the savages gave way,
and fled. We had no loss on our side: The enemy had one killed, and
two wounded. We took from them three horses, and all their baggage; and
being informed, by two of our number that went to their town, that the
Indians had entirely evacuated it, we proceeded no further, and returned
with all possible expedition to assist our garrison against the other
party. We passed by them on the sixth day, and on the seventh, we
arrived safe at Boonsborough.

On the eighth, the Indian army arrived, being four hundred and
forty-four in number, commanded by Capt. Duquesne, eleven other
Frenchmen, and some of their own chiefs, and marched up within view
of our fort, with British and French colours flying; and having sent a
summons to me, in his Britannick Majesty's name, to surrender the fort,
I requested two days consideration, which was granted.

It was now a critical period with us.--We were a small number in the
garrison.--A powerful army before our walls, whose appearance proclaimed
inevitable death, fearfully painted, and marking their footsteps with
desolation. Death was preferable to captivity; and if taken by storm,
we must inevitably be devoted to destruction. In this situation
we concluded to maintain our garrison, if possible. We immediately
proceeded to collect what we could of our horses, and other cattle, and
bring them through the posterns into the fort: And in the evening of
the ninth, I returned answer, that we were determined to defend our
fort while a man was living--Now, said I to their commander, who stood
attentively hearing my sentiments, We laugh at all your formidable
preparations: But thank you for giving us notice and time to provide for
our defence. Your efforts will not prevail; for our gates shall for ever
deny you admittance.--Whether this answer affected their courage, or
not, I cannot tell; but, contrary to our expectations, they formed
a scheme to deceive us, declaring it was their orders, from Governor
Hamilton, to take us captives, and not to destroy us; but if nine of
us would come out, and treat with them, they would immediatly withdraw
their forces from our walls, and return home peaceably. This sounded
grateful in our ears; and we agreed to the proposal.

We held the treaty within sixty yards of the garrison, on purpose to
divert them from a breach of honour, as we could not avoid suspicions of
the savages. In this situation the articles were formally agreed to,
and signed; and the Indians told us it was customary with them, on such
occasions, for two Indians to shake hands with every white-man in the
treaty, as an evidence of entire friendship. We agreed to this also,
but were soon convinced their policy was to take us prisoners.--They
immediately grappled us; but, although surrounded by hundreds of
savages, we extricated ourselves from them, and escaped all safe into
the garrison, except one that was wounded, through a heavy fire from
their army. They immediately attacked us on every side, and a constant
heavy fire ensued between us day and night for the space of nine days.

In this time the enemy began to undermine our fort, which was situated
sixty yards from Kentucke river. They began at the water-mark and
proceeded in the bank some distance, which we understood by their
making the water muddy with the clay; and we immediately proceeded to
disappoint their design, by cutting a trench across their subterranean
passage. The enemy discovering our counter-mine, by the clay we threw
out of the fort, desisted from that stratagem: And experience now fully
convincing them that neither their power nor policy could effect their
purpose, on the twentieth day of August they raised the siege, and
departed.

During this dreadful siege, which threatened death in every form, we had
two men killed, and four wounded, besides a number of cattle. We killed
of the enemy thirty-seven, and wounded a great number. After they were
gone, we picked up one hundred and twenty-five pounds weight of bullets,
besides what stuck in the logs of our fort; which certainly is a great
proof of their industry. Soon after this, I went into the settlement,
and nothing worthy of a place in this account passed in my affairs for
some time.

During my absence from Kentucke, Col. Bowman carried on an expedition
against the Shawanese, at Old Chelicothe, with one hundred and sixty
men, in July, 1779. Here they arrived undiscovered, and a battle ensued,
which lasted until ten o'clock, A. M. when Col. Bowman, finding he could
not succeed at this time, retreated about thirty miles. The Indians,
in the meantime, collecting all their forces, pursued and overtook him,
when a smart fight continued near two hours, not to the advantage of
Col. Bowman's party.

Col. Harrod proposed to mount a number of horse, and furiously to rush
upon the savages, who at this time fought with remarkable fury. This
desperate step had a happy effect, broke their line of battle, and the
savages fled on all sides. In these two battles we had nine killed, and
one wounded. The enemy's loss uncertain, only two scalps being taken.

On the twenty-second day of June, 1780, a large party of Indians and
Canadians, about six hundred in number, commanded by Col. Bird, attacked
Riddle's and Martin's stations, at the Forks of Licking River, with six
pieces of artillery. They carried this expedition so secretly, that
the unwary inhabitants did not discover them, until they fired upon the
forts; and, not being prepared to oppose them, were obliged to surrender
themselves miserable captives to barbarous savages, who immediately
after tomahawked one man and two women, and loaded all the others with
heavy baggage, forcing them along toward their towns, able or unable
to march. Such as were weak and faint by the way, they tomahawked. The
tender women, and helpless children, fell victims to their cruelty.
This, and the savage treatment they received afterwards, is shocking to
humanity, and too barbarous to relate.

The hostile disposition of the savages, and their allies, caused General
Clark, the commandant at the Falls of the Ohio, immediately to begin an
expedition with his own regiment, and the armed force of the country,
against Pecaway, the principal town of the Shawanese, on a branch
of Great Miami, which he finished with great success, took seventeen
scalps, and burnt the town to ashes, with the loss of seventeen men.

About this time I returned to Kentucke with my family; and here, to
avoid an enquiry into my conduct, the reader being before informed of
my bringing my family to Kentucke, I am under the necessity of informing
him that, during my captivity with the Indians, my wife, who despaired
of ever seeing me again, expecting the Indians had put a period to my
life, oppressed with the distresses of the country, and bereaved of me,
her only happiness, had, before I returned, transported my family and
goods, on horses, through the wilderness, amidst a multitude of dangers,
to her father's house, in North-Carolina.

Shortly after the troubles at Boonsborough, I went to them, and lived
peaceably there until this time. The history of my going home, and
returning with my family, forms a series of difficulties, an account
of which would swell a volume, and being foreign to my purpose, I shall
purposely omit them.

I settled my family in Boonsborough once more; and shortly after, on
the sixth day of October, 1780, I went in company with my brother to the
Blue Licks; and, on our return home, we were fired upon by a party of
Indians. They shot him, and pursued me, by the scent of their dog, three
miles; but I killed the dog, and escaped. The winter soon came on, and
was very severe, which confined the Indians to their wigwams.

The severity of this Winter caused great difficulties in Kentucke. The
enemy had destroyed most of the corn, the Summer before. This necessary
article was scarce, and dear; and the inhabitants lived chiefly on the
flesh of buffaloes. The circumstances of many were very lamentable:
However, being a hardy race of people, and accustomed to difficulties
and necessities, they were wonderfully supported through all their
sufferings, until the ensuing Fall, when we received abundance from the
fertile soil.

Towards Spring, we were frequently harassed by Indians; and, in May,
1782, a party assaulted Ashton's station, killed one man, and took
a Negro prisoner. Capt. Ashton, with twenty-five men, pursued, and
overtook the savages, and a smart fight ensued, which lasted two hours;
but they being superior in number, obliged Captain Ashton's party to
retreat, with the loss of eight killed, and four mortally wounded; their
brave commander himself being numbered among the dead.

The Indians continued their hostilities; and, about the tenth of August
following, two boys were taken from Major Hoy's station. This party was
pursued by Capt. Holder and seventeen men, who were also defeated, with
the loss of four men killed, and one wounded. Our affairs became more
and more alarming. Several stations which had lately been erected in the
country were continually infested with savages, stealing their horses
and killing the men at every opportunity. In a field, near Lexington, an
Indian shot a man, and running to scalp him, was himself shot from the
fort, and fell dead upon his enemy.

Every day we experienced recent mischiefs. The barbarous savage nations
of Shawanese, Cherokees, Wyandots, Tawas, Delawares, and several others
near Detroit, united in a war against us, and assembled their choicest
warriors at old Chelicothe, to go on the expedition, in order to
destroy us, and entirely depopulate the country. Their savage minds were
inflamed to mischief by two abandoned men, Captains McKee and Girty.
These led them to execute every diabolical scheme; and, on the fifteenth
day of August, commanded a party of Indians and Canadians, of about five
hundred in number, against Briant's station, five miles from Lexington.
Without demanding a surrender, they furiously assaulted the garrison,
which was happily prepared to oppose them; and, after they had expended
much ammunition in vain, and killed the cattle round the fort, not being
likely to make themselves masters of this place, they raised the siege,
and departed in the morning of the third day after they came, with the
loss of about thirty killed, and the number of wounded uncertain.--Of
the garrison four were killed, and three wounded.

On the eighteenth day Col. Todd, Col. Trigg, Major Harland, and myself,
speedily collected one hundred and seventy-six men, well armed, and
pursued the savages. They had marched beyond the Blue Licks to a
remarkable bend of the main fork of Licking River, about forty-three
miles from Lexington, as it is particularly represented in the map,
where we overtook them on the nineteenth day. The savages observing us,
gave way; and we, being ignorant of their numbers, passed the river.
When the enemy saw our proceedings, having greatly the advantage of us
in situation, they formed the line of battle, represented in the map,
from one bend of Licking to the other, about a mile from the Blue Licks.
An exceeding fierce battle immediately began, for about fifteen minutes,
when we, being over-powered by numbers, were obliged to retreat, with
the loss of sixty-seven men; seven of whom were taken prisoners. The
brave and much lamented Colonels Todd and Trigg, Major Harland and my
second son, were among the dead. We were informed that the Indians,
numbering their dead, found they had four killed more than we; and
therefore, four of the prisoners they had taken, were, by general
consent, ordered to be killed, in a most barbarous manner, by the young
warriors, in order to train them up to cruelty; and then they proceeded
to their towns.

On our retreat we were met by Col. Logan, hastening to join us, with
a number of well armed men: This powerful assistance we unfortunately
wanted in the battle; for, notwithstanding the enemy's superiority of
numbers, they acknowledged that, if they had received one more fire from
us, they should undoubtedly have given way. So valiantly did our small
party fight, that, to the memory of those who unfortunately fell in the
battle, enough of honour cannot be paid. Had Col. Logan and his party
been with us, it is highly probable we should have given the savages a
total defeat.

I cannot reflect upon this dreadful scene, but sorrow fills my heart. A
zeal for the defence of their country led these heroes to the scene of
action, though with a few men to attack a powerful army of experienced
warriors. When we gave way, they pursued us with the utmost eagerness,
and in every quarter spread destruction. The river was difficult to
cross, and many were killed in the flight, some just entering the river,
some in the water, others after crossing in ascending the cliffs. Some
escaped on horse-back, a few on foot; and, being dispersed every where,
in a few hours, brought the melancholy news of this unfortunate battle
to Lexington. Many widows were now made. The reader may guess what
sorrow filled the hearts of the inhabitants, exceeding any thing that I
am able to describe. Being reinforced, we returned to bury the dead, and
found their bodies strewed every where, cut and mangled in a dreadful
manner. This mournful scene exhibited a horror almost unparalleled: Some
torn and eaten by wild beasts; those in the river eaten by fishes; all
in such a putrified condition, that no one could be distinguished from
another.

As soon as General Clark, then at the Falls of the Ohio, who was
ever our ready friend, and merits the love and gratitude of all his
country-men, understood the circumstances of this unfortunate action, he
ordered an expedition, with all possible haste, to pursue the savages,
which was so expeditiously effected, that we overtook them within two
miles of their towns, and probably might have obtained a great victory,
had not two of their number met us about two hundred poles before we
come up. These returned quick as lightening to their camp with the
alarming news of a mighty army in view. The savages fled in the utmost
disorder, evacuated their towns, and reluctantly left their territory
to our mercy. We immediately took possession of Old Chelicothe without
opposition, being deserted by its inhabitants. We continued our pursuit
through five towns on the Miami rivers, Old Chelicothe, Pecaway, New
Chelicothe, Will's Towns, and Chelicothe, burnt them all to ashes,
entirely destroyed their corn, and other fruits, and every where spread
a scene of desolation in the country. In this expedition we took seven
prisoners and five scalps, with the loss of only four men, two of whom
were accidentally killed by our own army.

This campaign in some measure damped the spirits of the Indians, and
made them sensible of our superiority. Their connections were dissolved,
their armies scattered, and a future invasion put entirely out of
their power; yet they continued to practise mischief secretly upon the
inhabitants, in the exposed parts of the country.

In October following, a party made an excursion into that district
called the Crab Orchard, and one of them, being advanced some distance
before the others, boldly entered the house of a poor defenceless
family, in which was only a Negro man, a woman and her children,
terrified with the apprehensions of immediate death. The savage,
perceiving their defenceless situation, without offering violence to
the family attempted to captivate the Negro, who, happily proved an
over-match for him, threw him on the ground, and, in the struggle, the
mother of the children drew an ax from a corner of the cottage, and
cut his head off, while her little daughter shut the door. The savages
instantly appeared, and applied their tomahawks to the door. An old
rusty gun-barrel, without a lock, lay in a corner, which the mother put
through a small crevice, and the savages, perceiving it, fled. In the
mean time, the alarm spread through the neighbourhood; the armed men
collected immediately, and pursued the ravagers into the wilderness.
Thus Providence, by the means of this Negro, saved the whole of the poor
family from destruction. From that time, until the happy return of
peace between the United States and Great-Britain, the Indians did us
no mischief. Finding the great king beyond the water disappointed in
his expectations, and conscious of the importance of the Long Knife, and
their own wretchedness, some of the nations immediately desired peace;
to which, at present, they seem universally disposed, and are sending
ambassadors to General Clark, at the Falls of the Ohio, with the minutes
of their Councils, a specimen of which, in the minutes of the Piankashaw
Council, is subjoined.

To conclude, I can now say that I have verified the saying of an old
Indian who signed Col. Henderson's deed. Taking me by the hand, at the
delivery thereof, Brother, says he, we have given you a fine land, but
I believe you will have much trouble in settling it.--My footsteps have
often been marked with blood, and therefore I can truly subscribe to its
original name. Two darling sons, and a brother, have I lost by savage
hands, which have also taken from me forty valuable horses, and
abundance of cattle. Many dark and sleepless nights have I been a
companion for owls, separated from the chearful society of men, scorched
by the Summer's sun, and pinched by the Winter's cold, an instrument
ordained to settle the wilderness. But now the scene is changed: Peace
crowns the sylvan shade.


What thanks, what ardent and ceaseless thanks are due to that
all-superintending Providence which has turned a cruel war into peace,
brought order out of confusion, made the fierce savages placid, and
turned away their hostile weapons from our country! May the same
Almighty Goodness banish the accursed monster, war, from all lands,
with her hated associates, rapine and insatiable ambition. Let peace,
descending from her native heaven, bid her olives spring amidst the
joyful nations; and plenty, in league with commerce, scatter blessings
from her copious hand.

This account of my adventures will inform the reader of the most
remarkable events of this country.--I now live in peace and safety,
enjoying the sweets of liberty, and the bounties of Providence, with
my once fellow-sufferers, in this delightful country, which I have seen
purchased with a vast expence of blood and treasure, delighting in the
prospect of its being, in a short time, one of the most opulent and
powerful states on the continent of North America; which, with the love
and gratitude of my country-men, I esteem a sufficient reward for all my
toil and dangers.

Fayette county, Kentucke.

DANIEL BOON









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boone, by 
John Filson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF COLONEL BOONE ***

***** This file should be named 909.txt or 909.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/0/909/

Produced by John M. Krafft

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
