The Project Gutenberg EBook of Codex Junius 11, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Codex Junius 11

Author: Unknown

Posting Date: August 30, 2008 [EBook #618]
Release Date: August, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CODEX JUNIUS 11 ***




Produced by Douglas B. Killings.  HTML version by Al Haines.









Codex Junius 11

(Author unknown)




This file contains translations from the Anglo-Saxon of the
following works: "Genesis A", "Genesis B", "Exodus", "Daniel",
and "Christ and Satan".  All are works found in the manuscript of
Anglo-Saxon verse known as "Junius 11."

These works were originally written in Anglo-Saxon, sometime
between the 7th and 10th Centuries A.D.  Although sometimes
ascribed to the poet Caedmon (fl. late 7th Century), it is
generally thought that these poems do not represent the work of
one single poet.





BIBLIOGRAPHY:

Other Translations--

Bradley, S.A.J.: "Anglo-Saxon Poetry" (Everyman Press, London,
1982)


Critical Editions--

Doane, A.N. (ed.): "Genesis A: A New Critical Edition"
(University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1978)

Doane, A.N. (ed.): "The Saxon Genesis: An Edition of the West
Saxon Genesis B and the Old Saxon Vatican Genesis" (University of
Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1991)

Dobbie, Elliot VanKirk (ed.): "The Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records,
vol. I--The Junius Manuscript" (Columbia University Press, New
York, 1937)

Farrell, R.T. (ed.): "Daniel and Azarias" (Methuen & Co. Ltd.,
London, 1974)

Tolkein, J.R.R. (ed.): "The Old English Exodus" (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1981)





GENESIS (Genesis A & B)

NOTE: This work is generally believed to be a composite of two
separate poems, usually referred to as "Genesis A" (or "The
Earlier Genesis") and "Genesis B" (or "The Later Genesis").
"Genesis A" is the work at lines #1-234 and #852-2935; "Genesis
B" is interpolated into "Genesis A" at lines #235-851.

The reason for this interpolation is not known.  Perhaps the
original compiler preferred the version of the story presented in
"Genesis B", or perhaps the text of "Genesis A" from which he was
working with was missing this section.  Adding to this confusion
is evidence that "Genesis B" appears to be a translation from an
earlier and separate Old Saxon retelling of the biblical "Book of
Genesis", a fragment of which (corresponding to lines #791-817 of
"Genesis B") survives.

"Genesis", like the other poems of "Codex Junius 11", is not a
direct translation into Anglo-Saxon of the Old Testament "Book of
Genesis".  Rather, it is an effort to retell the story in the
poetry and style of the Germanic Epic, a style still popular with
the Anglo-Saxons at the time "Junius 11" was compiled.

--DBK



CONTENTS

LIBER I

  Genesis (I-IV)
  Genesis B (IV-XIV)
  Exodus (XLII-XLIX)
  Daniel (L-LV)

LIBER II

  Christ and Satan (I-VII)
  The Harrowing of Hell (VIII-XII)
  The Temptation




LIBER I

I

(ll. 1-28) Right is it that we praise the King of heaven, the
Lord of hosts, and love Him with all our hearts.  For He is great
in power, the Source of all created things, the Lord Almighty.
Never hath He known beginning, neither cometh an end of His
eternal glory.  Ever in majesty He reigneth over celestial
thrones; in righteousness and strength He keepeth the courts of
heaven which were established, broad and ample, by the might of
God, for angel dwellers, wardens of the soul.  The angel legions
knew the blessedness of God, celestial joy and bliss.  Great was
their glory!  The mighty spirits magnified their Prince and sang
His praise with gladness, serving the Lord of life, exceeding
blessed in His splendour.  They knew no sin nor any evil; but
dwelt in peace for ever with their Lord.  They wrought no deed in
heaven save right and truth, until the angel prince in pride
walked in the ways of error.  Then no longer would they work
their own advantage, but turned away from the love of God.  They
boasted greatly, in their banded strength, that they could share
with God His glorious dwelling, spacious and heavenly bright.

(ll. 28-46) Then sorrow came upon them, envy and insolence and
pride of the angel who first began that deed of folly, to plot
and hatch it forth, and, thirsting for battle, boasted that in
the northern borders of heaven he would establish a throne and a
kingdom.  Then was God angered and wrathful against that host
which He had crowned before with radiance and glory.  For the
traitors, to reward their work, He shaped a house of pain and
grim affliction, and lamentations of hell.  Our Lord prepared
this torture-house of exiles, deep and joyless, for the coming of
the angel hosts. Well He knew it lay enshrouded in eternal night,
and filled with woe, wrapped in fire and piercing cold,
smoke-veils and ruddy flame.  And over that wretched realm He
spread the brooding terror of torment.  They had wrought grievous
wrong together against God.  Grim the reward they gained!

(ll. 47-77) Fierce of heart, they boasted they would take the
kingdom, and easily.  But their hope failed them when the Lord,
High King of heaven, lifted His hand against their host.  The
erring spirits, in their sin, might not prevail against the Lord,
but God, the Mighty, in His wrath, smote their insolence and
broke their pride, bereft these impious souls of victory and
power and dominion and glory; despoiled His foes of bliss and
peace and joy and radiant grace, and mightily avenged His wrath
upon them to their destruction.  His heart was hardened against
them; with heavy hand He crushed His foes, subdued them to His
will, and, in His wrath, drove out the rebels from their ancient
home and seats of glory.  Our Lord expelled and banished out of
heaven the presumptuous angel host.  All-wielding God dismissed
the faithless horde, a hostile band of woeful spirits, upon a
long, long journey.  Crushed was their pride, their boasting
humbled, their power broken, their glory dimmed.  Thenceforth
those dusky spirits dwelt in exile.  No cause had they to laugh
aloud, but, racked with pangs of hell, they suffered pain and woe
and tribulation, cloaked with darkness, knowing bitter anguish, a
grim requital, because they sought to strive with God.

(ll. 78-81) Then was there calm as formerly in heaven, the kindly
ways of peace.  The Lord was dear to all, a Prince among His
thanes, and glory was renewed of angel legions knowing blessedness
with God.


II

(ll. 82-91) The citizens of heaven, the home of glory, dwelt
again in concord.  Strife was at an end among the angels, discord
and dissension, when those warring spirits, shorn of light, were
hurled from heaven.  Behind them stretching wide their mansions
lay, crowned with glory, prospering in grace in God's dominion, a
sunny, fruitful land, empty of dwellers, when the accursed
spirits reached their place of exile within Hell's prison-walls.

(ll. 92-102) Then our Lord took counsel in the thoughts of His
heart how He might people, with a better host, the great
creation, the native seats and gleaming mansions, high in heaven,
wherefrom these boastful foes had got them forth.  Therefore with
mighty power Holy God ordained, beneath the arching heavens, that
earth and sky and the far-bounded sea should be established,
earth-creatures in the stead of those rebellious foes whom He had
cast from heaven.

(ll. 103-119) As yet was nought save shadows of darkness; the
spacious earth lay hidden, deep and dim, alien to God, unpeopled
and unused.  Thereon the Steadfast King looked down and beheld
it, a place empty of joy.  He saw dim chaos hanging in eternal
night, obscure beneath the heavens, desolate and dark, until this
world was fashioned by the word of the King of glory.  Here first
with mighty power the Everlasting Lord, the Helm of all created
things, Almighty King, made earth and heaven, raised up the sky
and founded the spacious land.  The earth was not yet green with
grass; the dark waves of the sea flowed over it, and midnight
darkness was upon it, far and wide.

(ll. 119-134) Then in radiant glory God's holy spirit moved upon
the waters with wondrous might.  The Lord of angels, Giver of
life, bade light shine forth upon the spacious earth.  Swiftly
was God's word fulfilled; holy light gleamed forth across the
waste at the Creator's bidding.  Over the seas the Lord of
victory divided light from darkness, shadow from radiant light.
The Lord of life gave both a name.  By the word of God the
gleaming light was first called day.  And in the beginning of
creation was God well pleased.  The first day saw the dark and
brooding shadows vanish throughout the spacious earth.


III

(ll. 135-143) The day departed, hasting over the dwellings of
earth.  And after the gleaming light the Lord, our maker, thrust
on the first of evenings.  Murky gloom pressed hard upon the
heels of day; God called it night.  Our Lord sundered them, one
from the other; and ever since they follow out the will of God to
do it on the earth.

(ll. 143-153) Then came a second day, light after darkness.  And
the Lord of life ordained a pleasant firmament amid the waters.
Our Lord sundered the seas and established the heavens.  By His
word the King, Almighty God, raised them above the earth.  The
waters were divided under the heavens by His holy might; the
waters were sundered from the waters, under the firmament.

(ll. 154-168) Then came hasting over the earth the third fair
morning.  Not yet were the wide ways and spacious tracts useful
unto God, but the land lay covered by the deep.  The Lord of
angels, by His word, commanded that the waters come together,
which now beneath the heavens hold their course and place
ordained.  Then suddenly, wide-stretching under heaven, lay the
sea, as God gave bidding.  The great deep was sundered from the
land.  The Warden of life, the Lord of hosts, beheld the dry
ground far outspread.  And the King of glory called it earth.
For the ocean-billows and the wide-flung sea He set a lawful path
and lettered them....

((LACUNA--two to three leaves missing))


IV

(ll. 169-191) ....It did not seem good to the Lord of heaven that
Adam should longer be alone as warden and keeper of this new
Paradise.  Wherefore the King, Almighty God, wrought him an
helpmeet; the Author of life made woman and brought her unto the
man whom He loved.  He took the stuff of Adam's body, and
secretly drew forth a rib from his side.  He was fast asleep in
peaceful slumber; he knew no pain nor any pang; there came no
blood from out the wound, but the Lord of angels drew forth from
his body a growing rib, and the man was unhurt.  Of this God
fashioned a lovely maid, breathing into her life and an eternal
soul.  They were like unto the angels.  The bride of Adam was a
living spirit.  By God's might both were born into the world in
the loveliness of youth.  They knew no sin nor any evil, but in
the hearts of both there burned the love of God.

(ll. 192-195) Then the Gracious King, Lord of all human kind,
blessed these two, male and female, man and wife, and spake this
word:

(ll. 196-205) "Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the green earth
with your seed and increase, sons and daughters.  And ye shall
have dominion over the salt sea, and over all the world.  Enjoy
the riches of earth, the fish of the sea, and the fowls of the
air.  To you is given power over the herds which I have hallowed,
and the wild beasts, and over all living things that move upon
the earth; all living things, which the depths bring forth
throughout the sea, shall be subject unto you."

((LACUNA--One or more leaves missing))

(ll. 206-234) And our Lord beheld the beauty of His works and the
abundance of all fruits of this new creation: Paradise lay
pleasant and inviting, filled with goodly store and endless
blessings.  Bountifully a running stream, a welling spring,
watered that pleasant land.  Not yet did clouds, dark with wind,
carry the rains across the spacious earth; nathless the land lay
decked with increase.  Out from this new Paradise four pleasant
brooks of water flowed.  All were divisions of one beauteous
stream, sundered by the might of God when He made the earth, and
sent into the world.  And one of these the mortal dwellers of
earth called Pison, which compasseth the land of Havilah about
with shining waters.  And in that land, as books tell us, the
sons of men from far and near find out the best of gold and
precious gems.  And the second floweth round about the land and
borders of the Ethiopians, a spacious kingdom.  Its name is
Gihon.  The third is Tigris, whose abundant stream lieth about
the limits of Assyria.  Likewise also the fourth, which now
through many a folk-land men call Euphrates....

((LACUNA--At least one, possibly two, leaves missing))


(Beginning of "Genesis B")

V

(ll. 235-236) "...Eat freely of the fruit of every other tree.
From that one tree refrain.  Beware of its fruit.  And ye shall
know no dearth of pleasant things."

(ll. 237-245) Eagerly they bowed them down before the King of
heaven, and gave Him thanks for all, for His teachings and
counsels.  And He gave them that land to dwell in.  Then the Holy
Lord, the Steadfast King, departed into heaven.  And the
creatures of His hand abode together on the earth.  They had no
whit of care to grieve them, but only to do the will of God for
ever.  Dear were they unto God as long as they would keep His
holy word.


VI

(ll. 246-260) The Holy Lord, All-wielding God, with mighty hand
had wrought ten angel-orders in whom He trusted well, that they
would do Him service, and work His will.  Therefore God gave them
reason, with His own hands shaped them, and stablished them in
bliss.  But one He made so great and strong of heart, He let him
wield such power in heaven next unto God, so radiant-hued He
wrought him, so fair his form in heaven which God had given, that
he was like unto the shining stars.  He should have sung his
Maker's praise, and prized his bliss in heaven.  He should have
thanked his Lord for the great boon He showered on him in the
heavenly light, and let him long enjoy.  But he turned him to a
worse thing, and strove to stir up strife against the Highest
Lord of heaven, who sitteth on the throne of glory.

(ll. 261-276) Dear was he to our Lord.  Nor could it long be hid
from God that pride was growing in His angel's heart.  He set
himself against his Leader, scoffed at God with boasting, and
would not serve Him.  He said his form was beautiful and bright,
gleaming and fair of hue.  Nor could he find it in his heart to
serve the Lord God, or be subject to Him.  It seemed to him that
he had greater strength and larger following than Holy God might
have.  Many words the angel spake in his presumption.  By his own
power alone he thought to build a stronger throne and mightier in
heaven.  He said his heart was urging him to toil, to build a
stately palace in the north and west.  He said he doubted in his
heart if he would still be subject unto God:

(ll. 277-291) "Why should I slave?" quoth he. "I need not serve a
master.  My hands are strong to work full many a wonder.  Power
enough have I to rear a goodlier throne, a higher in the heavens.
Why should I fawn for His favour, or yield Him such submission?
I may be God as well as He!  Brave comrades stand about me;
stout-hearted heroes who will not fail me in the fray.  These
valiant souls have chosen me their lord.  With such peers one may
ponder counsel, and gain a following.  Devoted are these friends
and faithful-hearted; and I may be their lord and rule this
realm.  It seemeth no wise right to me that I should cringe a
whit to God for any good.  I will not serve Him longer."

(ll. 292-298) Now when God had heard all this, how His angel was
beginning to make presumptuous head against his Leader, speaking
rash words of insolence against his Lord, needs must he make
atonement for that deed, endure the woe of strife, and bear his
punishment, most grievous of all deaths.  And so doth every man
who wickedly thinketh to strive with God, the Lord of might.

(ll. 299-319) Then Almighty God, High Lord of heaven, was filled
with wrath, and hurled him from his lofty throne.  He had gained
his Master's hate, and lost His favour.  God's heart was hardened
against him.  Wherefore he needs must sink into the pit of
torment because he strove against the Lord of heaven.  He
banished him from grace and cast him into hell, into the deep
abyss where he became a devil.  The Fiend and all his followers
fell from heaven; three nights and days the angels fell from
heaven into hell.  God changed them all to devils.  Because they
heeded not His deed and word, therefore Almighty God hurled them
into darkness, deep under earth, crushed them and set them in the
mirk of hell.  There through the never-ending watches of the
night the fiends endure an unremitting fire.  Then at the dawn
cometh an east wind, and bitter frost, ever a blast of fire or
storm of frost.  And each must have his share of suffering
wrought for his punishment.  Their world was changed when God
filled full the pit of hell with His foes!

(ll. 320-322) But the angels who kept their faith with God dwelt
in the heights of heaven.


VII

(ll. 322-336) The other fiends who waged so fierce a war with God
lay wrapped in flames.  They suffer torment, hot and surging
flame in the midst of hell, broad-stretching blaze of fire and
bitter smoke, darkness and gloom, because they broke allegiance
unto God.  Their folly and the angel's pride deceived them.  They
would not heed the word of God.  Great was their punishment!
They fell, through folly and through pride, to fiery depths of
flame in hell.  They sought another home devoid of light and
filled with fire--a mighty flaming death.  The fiends perceived
that through the might of God, because of their presumptuous
hearts and boundless insolence, they had won a measureless woe.

(ll. 337-355) Then spake their haughty king, who formerly was
fairest of the angels, most radiant in heaven, beloved of his
Leader and dear unto his Lord, until they turned to folly, and
Almighty God was moved to anger at their wantonness, and hurled
him down to depths of torment on that bed of death.  He named him
with a name, and said their leader should be called from
thenceforth Satan.  He bade him rule the black abyss of hell in
place of striving against God.  Satan spake--who now must needs
have charge of hell and dwell in the abyss--in bitterness he
spake who once had been God's angel, radiant-hued in heaven,
until his pride and boundless arrogance betrayed him, so that he
would not do the bidding of the Lord of hosts.  Bitterness was
welling in his heart; and round him blazed his cruel torment.
These words he spake:

(ll. 355-367) "This narrow place is little like those other
realms we knew, on high in heaven, allotted by my Lord, though
the Almighty hath not granted us to hold our state, or rule our
kingdom.  He hath done us wrong to hurl us to the fiery depths of
hell, and strip us of our heavenly realm.  He hath ordained that
human kind shall settle there.  That is my greatest grief that
Adam--wrought of earth--should hold my firm-set throne and
live in joy, while we endure this bitter woe in hell.

(ll. 368-388) "Alas! could I but use my hands and have my
freedom for an hour, one winter hour, then with this host I would--  But
bands of iron crush me down, the bondage of my chains is
heavy.  I am stripped of my dominion.  Firmly are hell's fetters
forged upon me.  Above me and below a blaze of fire!  Never have
I seen a realm more fatal--flame unassuaged that surges over
hell.  Ensnaring links and heavy shackles hold me.  My ways are
trammelled up; my feet are bound; my hands are fastened.  Closed
are the doors of hell, the way cut off.  I may not escape out of
my bonds, but mighty gyves of tempered iron, hammered hot, press
hard upon me.  God hath set His foot upon my neck.  So I know the
Lord of hosts hath read the purpose of my heart, and knew full
well that strife would grow between our host and Adam over the
heavenly realm, had I the freedom of my hands.


VIII

(ll. 389-400) "But now we suffer throes of hell, fire and
darkness, bottomless and grim.  God hath thrust us out into the
black mists.  He cannot charge upon us any sin or evil wrought
against Him in His realm!  Yet hath He robbed us of the light and
cast us into utter woe.  Nor may we take revenge, nor do Him any
evil because He stripped us of the light.  He hath marked out the
borders of the world, and there created man in His own image,
with whom He hopes again to people heaven, with pure souls.  We
needs must ponder earnestly to wreak this grudge on Adam, if we
may, and on his children, and thwart His will if so we may
devise.

(ll. 401-407) "No longer have I any hope of light wherein He
thinketh long to joy, in bliss among His angel hosts; nor may we
ever bring this thing to pass, that we should change the purpose
of Almighty God.  Let us therefore turn the heavenly kingdom from
the sons of men, since we may not possess it, cause them to lose
His favour and turn aside from the command He laid upon them.
Then shall His wrath be kindled, and He shall cast them out from
grace.  They shall seek out hell and its grim gulf, and in this
heavy bondage we may have the sons of men to serve us.

(ll. 408-424) "Begin now and plan this enterprise.  If ever in
olden days, when happily we dwelt in that good kingdom, and held
possession of our thrones, I dealt out princely treasure to any
thane, he could not make requital for my gifts at any better time
than now, if some one of my thanes would be my helper, escaping
outward through these bolted gates, with strength to wing his way
on high where, new-created, Adam and Eve, surrounded with
abundance, dwell on earth--and we are cast out hither in this
deep abyss.  They are now much dearer unto God, and own the high
estate and rightful realm which we should have in heaven!  Good
fortune is allotted to mankind.

(ll. 425-437) "My soul is sorrowful within me, my heart is sore,
that they should hold the heavenly realm for ever.  But if in any
wise some one of you could bring them to forsake God's word and
teaching, soon would they be less pleasing unto Him!  If they
break His commandment, then will His wrath be kindled.  Their
high estate shall vanish; their sin shall have requital, and some
grim penalty.  Take thought now how ye may ensnare them.  I shall
rest softly in these chains if they lose heaven.  Whoso shall
bring this thing to pass shall have reward for ever, of all that
we may win to our advantage, amid these flames.


IX

(ll. 438-441) I will let him sit next me, whoever shall return to
hell proclaiming that they have set at naught, by word and deed,
the counsels of the King of heaven and been displeasing to the
Lord."

((LACUNA--Section missing of indeterminate length.))


XI

(ll. 442-460) Then God's enemy began to make him ready, equipped
in war-gear, with a wily heart.  He set his helm of darkness on
his head, bound it full hard, and fastened it with clasps.  Many
a crafty speech he knew, many a crooked word.  Upward he beat his
way and darted through the doors of hell.  He had a ruthless
heart.  Evil of purpose he circled in the air, cleaving the flame
with fiendish craft.  He would fain ensnare God's servants unto
sin, seduce them and deceive them that they might be displeasing
to the Lord.  With fiendish craft he took his way until he came
on Adam upon earth, the finished handiwork of God, full wisely
wrought, and his wife beside him, loveliest of women, performing
many a goodly service since the Lord of men appointed them His
ministers.

(ll. 460-477) And by them stood two trees laden with fruit and
clothed with increase.  Almighty God, High King of heaven, had
set them there that the mortal sons of men might choose of good
and evil, weal and woe.  Unlike was their fruit!  Of the one tree
the fruit was pleasant, fair and winsome, excellent and sweet.
That was the tree of life.  He might live for ever in the world
who ate of that fruit, so that old age pressed not heavily upon
him, nor grievous sickness, but he might live his life in
happiness for ever, and have the favour of the King of heaven
here on earth.  And glory was ordained for him in heaven, when he
went hence.

(ll. 478-495) The other tree was dark, sunless, and full of
shadows: that was the tree of death.  Bitter the fruit it bore!
And every man must know both good and evil; in this world abased
he needs must suffer, in sweat and sorrow, who tasted of the
fruit that grew upon that tree.  Old age would rob him of his
strength and joy and honour, and death take hold upon him.  A
little time might he enjoy this life, and then seek out the murky
realm of flame, and be subject unto fiends.  There of all perils
are the worst for men for ever.  And that the evil one knew well,
the wily herald of the fiend who fought with God.  He took the
form of a serpent, coiled round the tree of death by devil's
craft, and plucked the fruit, and turned aside again where he
beheld the handiwork of the King of heaven.  And the evil one in
lying words began to question him:

(ll. 496-506) "Hast thou any longing, Adam, unto God?  His
service brings me hither from afar.  Not long since I was sitting
at His side.  He sent me forth upon this journey to bid thee eat
this fruit.  He said thy strength and power would increase, thy
mind be mightier, more beautiful thy body, and thy form more
fair.  He said thou wouldest lack no good thing on the earth when
thou hast won the favour of the King of heaven, served thy Lord
with gladness, and deserved His love.

(ll. 507-521) "In the heavenly light I heard Him speaking of thy
life, praising thy words and works.  Needs must thou do His
bidding which His messengers proclaim on earth.  Broad-stretching
are the green plains of the world, and from the highest realms of
heaven God ruleth all things here below.  The Lord of men will
not Himself endure the hardship to go upon this journey, but
sendeth His ministers to speak with thee.  He sendeth tidings
unto thee to teach thee wisdom.  Do His will with gladness!  Take
this fruit in thy hand; taste and eat.  Thy heart shall grow more
roomy and thy form more fair.  Almighty God, thy Lord, sendeth
this help from heaven."

(ll. 522-546) And Adam, first of men, answered where he stood on
earth: "When I heard the Lord, my God, speaking with a mighty
voice, He bade me dwell here keeping His commandments, gave me
this woman, this lovely maid, bade me take heed and be not
tempted to the tree of death and utterly beguiled, and said that
he who taketh to his heart one whit of evil shall dwell in
blackest hell.  Though thou art come with lies and secret wiles,
I know not that thou art an angel of the Lord from heaven.  Lo!
I cannot understand thy precepts, thy words or ways, thy errand
or thy sayings.  I know what things our Lord commanded when I
beheld Him nigh at hand.  He bade me heed His word, observe it
well, and keep His precepts.  Thou art not like to any of His
angels that ever I have seen, nor hast thou showed me any token
that my Lord hath sent of grace and favour.  Therefore I cannot
hearken to thy teachings.  Get thee hence!  I have my faith set
firm upon Almighty God, who with His own hands wrought me.  From
His high throne He giveth all good things, and needeth not to
send His ministers."


XII

(ll. 547-550) Then turned the fiend with wrathful heart to where
he saw Eve standing on the plains of earth, a winsome maid.  And
unto her he said, the greatest of all ills thereafter would fall
on their descendants in the world:

(ll. 551-558) "I know God's anger will be roused against you,
when from this journey through far-stretching space I come again
to Him, and bring this message, that ye refuse to do His bidding,
as He hath sent commandment hither from the East.  He needs must
come to speak with you, forsooth, nor may His minister proclaim
His mission!  Truly I know His wrath will be kindled against you
in His heart!

(ll. 559-587) "But if thou, woman, wilt hearken to my words, thou
mayest devise good counsel.  Bethink thee in thy heart to turn
away His vengeance from you both, as I shall show thee.  Eat of
this fruit!  Then shall thine eyes grow keen, and thou shalt see
afar through all the world, yea!  unto the throne of God, thy
Lord, and have His favour.  Thou mayest rule the heart of Adam,
if thou incline to do it and he doth trust thy words, if thou
wilt tell him truly what law thou hast in mind, to keep God's
precepts and commandments.  His heart will cease from bitter
strife and evil answers, as we two tell him for his good.  Urge
him earnestly to do thy bidding, lest ye be displeasing to the
Lord your God.  If thou fulfill this undertaking, thou best of
women, I will not tell our Lord what evil Adam spake against me,
his wicked words accusing me of falsehood, saying that I am eager
in transgression, a servant of the Fiend and not God's angel.
But I know well the angel race, and the high courts of heaven.
Long ages have I served the Lord my God with loyal heart.  I am
not like a devil."

(ll. 588-599) So he urged with lies and luring wiles, tempting
the woman unto sin, until the serpent's counsel worked within
her--for God had wrought her soul the weaker--and her heart
inclined according to his teaching.  Transgressing God's
commandment, from the fiend she took the fatal fruit of the tree
of death.  Never was worse deed wrought for men!  Great is the
wonder that Eternal God, the Lord, would let so many of His
thanes be tricked with lies by one who brought such counsel.  She
ate the fruit and set at naught the will and word of God.

(ll. 600-610) Then could she see afar by gift of the fiend, whose
lies deceived and artfully ensnared her, so that it came to pass
the heavens appeared to her more radiant, and the earth and all
the world more fair, the great and mighty handiwork of God,
though she beheld it not by human wisdom; but eagerly the fiend
deceived her soul and gave her vision, that she might see afar
across the heavenly kingdom.  Then spake the fiend with hostile
purpose--and nought of profit did he counsel:

(ll. 610-625) "Now mayest thou behold, most worthy Eve, nor need
I tell thee, how fair thy beauty and thy form how changed, since
thou didst trust my words and do my bidding.  A radiance shineth
round about thee, gleaming splendour, which I brought forth from
God on high.  Thou mayest touch it!  Tell Adam what vision thou
hast and power by my coming.  And even yet, if he will do my
bidding with humble heart, I will give him of this light
abundantly, as I have given thee, and will not punish his
reviling words, though he deserves no mercy for the grievous ill
he spake against me.  So shall his children live hereafter!  When
they do evil, they must win God's love, avert His doom, and gain
the favour of their Lord for ever!"

(ll. 626-635) Then the lovely maid, fairest of women that ever
came into this world, went unto Adam.  She was the handiwork of
the King of heaven, though tricked with lies and utterly undone,
so that through fiendish craft and devil's fraud she needs must
be displeasing to the Lord, forfeit God's favour, and lose her
glory and her heavenly home.  So often evil dwelleth with that
man who doth not shun it when he hath the power.

(ll. 636-646) Of the fatal apples some she carried in her hands
and some lay on her breast, the fruit of the tree of death
whereof the Lord of lords, the Prince of glory, had forbidden her
to eat, saying His servants need not suffer death.  The Holy Lord
bestowed a heavenly heritage and ample bliss on every race, if
they would but forgo that fruit alone, that bitter fruit, which
the mortal tree brought forth upon its boughs.  That was the tree
of death which the Lord forbade them!

(ll. 647-654) But the fiend, who hated God, and loathed the King
of heaven, deceived with lies Eve's heart and erring wisdom, and
she believed his words and did his bidding, and came at last to
think his counsels were indeed from God, as he so cunningly had
said.  He showed to her a token, and gave her promise of good
faith and friendly purpose.  Then to her lord she said:

(ll. 655-665) "Adam, my lord!  This fruit is sweet and pleasing
to the heart; this radiant messenger is God's good angel!  I know
by his attire he is a herald of our Lord, the King of heaven.
Better to win his favour than his wrath!  If thou to-day hast
spoken aught of evil, yet will he still forgive thee, if we will
do his will.  Of what avail this bitter strife against the herald
of thy Lord?  We need his favour.  For he may plead our cause
before Almighty God, the King of heaven.

(ll. 666-683) "I can behold where in the south and east He who
shaped the world sits veiled in splendour.  I see the angels
circling round His throne, in winged flight, unnumbered myriads,
clothed in beauty.  Who could give me such discernment, except it
be sent straight from God, the Lord of heaven?  Widely may I hear
and widely see through all the world across the broad creation.
I hear the hymns of rapture from on high.  Radiance blazes on my
soul without and within since first I tasted of the fruit.  Lo!
my good lord!  I bring thee in my hand this fruit, and give thee
freely of it.  I do believe that it is come from God, and brought
by His command, as this messenger declared in words of truth.  It
is not like aught else on earth except, as this herald saith, it
cometh straight from God."


XIII

(ll. 684-703) Long she pled, and urged him all the day to that
dark deed, to disobey their Lord's command.  Close stood the evil
fiend, inflaming with desire, luring with wiles, and boldly
tempting him.  The fiend stood near at hand who on that fatal
mission had come a long, long way.  He planned to hurl men down
to utter death, mislead them and deceive them, that they might
lose the gift of God, His favour and their heavenly realm.  Lo!
well the hell-fiend knew they must endure God's anger and the
pains of hell, suffer grim misery and woe, since they had broken
God's commandment, when with his lying words he tricked the
beauteous maid, fairest of women, unto that deed of folly, so
that she spake according to his will; and aided her in tempting
unto evil the handiwork of God.

(ll. 704-716) Over and over the fairest of women pled with Adam,
until she began to incline his heart so that he trusted the
command the woman laid upon him.  All this she did with good
intent, and knew not that so many evils, such grim afflictions,
would come upon mankind, when she was moved to hearken to the
counsels of the evil herald; but she hoped to win God's favour by
her words, showing such token and such pledge of truth unto the
man, that the mind of Adam was changed within his breast, and his
heart began to bend according to her will.

(ll. 717-726) From the woman he took both death and hell,
although it did not bear these names, but bore the name of fruit.
The sleep of death and fiends' seduction; death and hell and
exile and damnation--these were the fatal fruit whereon they
feasted.  And when the apple worked within him and touched his
heart, then laughed aloud the evilhearted fiend, capered about,
and gave thanks to his lord for both:

(ll. 726-749) "Now have I won thy promised favour, and wrought
thy will!  For many a day to come is man undone, Adam and Eve!
God's wrath shall be heavy upon them, for they have scorned His
precepts and commandments.  Wherefore they may no longer hold
their heavenly kingdom, but they must travel the dark road to
hell.  Thou needest not feel sorrow in thy heart, as thou liest
in thy bonds, nor mourn in spirit that men should dwell in heaven
above, while we now suffer misery and pain in realms of darkness,
and through thy pride have lost our high estate in heaven and
goodly dwellings.  God's anger was kindled against us because in
heaven we would not bow our heads in service before the Holy
Lord.  It pleased us not to serve Him.  Then was God moved to
wrath and hard of heart, and drove us into hell; cast a great
host into hell-fire, and with His hands prepared again in heaven
celestial thrones, and gave that kingdom to mankind.

(ll. 750-762) "Blithe be thy heart within thy breast!  For here
to-day are two things come to pass: the sons of men shall lose
their heavenly kingdom, and journey unto thee to burn in flame;
also heart-sorrow and affliction are visited on God.  Whatever
death we suffer here is now repaid on Adam in the wrath of God
and man's damnation and the pangs of death.  Therefore my heart
is healed, my soul untrammelled in my breast.  All our injuries
are now avenged, and all the evil that we long have suffered.
Now will I plunge again into the flame, and seek out Satan, where
he lieth in hell's shadows, bound with chains."

(ll. 762-769) Then the foul fiend sank downward to the wide-flung
flames and gates of hell wherein his lord lay bound.  But Adam
and Eve were wretched in their hearts; sad were the words that
passed between them.  They feared the anger of the Lord their
God; they dreaded the wrath of the King of heaven.  They knew
that His command was broken.

(ll. 770-790) The woman mourned and wept in sorrow (she had
forfeited God's grace and broken His commandment) when she beheld
the radiance disappear which he who brought this evil on them had
showed her by a faithless token, that they might suffer pangs of
hell and untold woe.  Wherefore heartsorrow burned within their
breasts.  Husband and wife they bowed them down in prayer,
beseeching God and calling on the Lord of heaven, and prayed that
they might expiate their sin, since they had broken God's
commandment.  They saw that their bodies were naked.  In that
land they had as yet no settled home, nor knew they aught of pain
or sorrow; but they might have prospered in the land if they had
done God's will.  Many a rueful word they uttered, husband and
wife together.  And Adam spake unto Eve and said:

(ll. 791-820) "O Eve!  a bitter portion hast thou won us!  Dost
thou behold the yawning gulf of hell, sunless, insatiate?  Thou
mayest hear the groans that rise therefrom!  The heavenly realm
is little like that blaze of fire!  Lo!  fairest of all lands is
this, which we, by God's grace, might have held hadst thou not
hearkened unto him who urged this evil, so that we set at naught
the word of God, the King of heaven.  Now in grief we mourn that
evil mission!  For God Himself bade us beware of sin and dire
disaster.  Now thirst and hunger press upon my heart whereof we
formerly were ever free.  How shall we live or dwell now in this
land if the wind blow from the west or east, south or north, if
mist arise and showers of hail beat on us from the heavens, and
frost cometh, wondrous cold, upon the earth, or, hot in heaven,
shineth the burning sun, and we two stand here naked and
unclothed?  We have no shelter from the weather, nor any store of
food.  And the Mighty Lord, our God, is angry with us.  What
shall become of us?  Now I repent me that I prayed the God of
heaven, the Gracious Lord, and of my limbs He wrought thee for my
helpmeet, since thou hast led me unto evil and the anger of my
Lord.  Well may I repent to all eternity that ever I beheld thee
with mine eyes!"


XIV

(ll. 821-823) Then spake Eve, the lovely maid, fairest of women.
(She was the work of God, though led astray by power of the
fiend):

(ll. 824-826) "Well mayest thou upbraid me, my dear Adam!  But
thou canst not repent one whit more bitterly in thy heart than my
heart repenteth."

(ll. 826-839) And Adam answered her: "If I but knew the will of
God, the penalty I needs must pay, thou couldest not find one
more swift to do it, though the Lord of heaven bade me go forth
and walk upon the sea.  The ocean-stream could never be so
wondrous deep or wide that ever my heart would doubt, but I would
go even unto the bottom of the sea, if I might work the will of
God.  I have no wish for years of manhood in the world now that I
have forfeited the favour of my Lord, and lost His grace.  But we
may not be thus together, naked.  Let us go into this grove, and
under the shelter of this wood."

(ll. 840-851) And they turned and went weeping into the green
wood, and sat them down apart from one another to wait the fate
the Lord of heaven should assign them, since they had lost their
former state and portion which Almighty God had given them.  And
they covered their bodies with leaves, and clothed them with the
foliage of the wood, for they had no garments.  And both together
bowed in prayer; and every morning they besought Almighty God,
the Gracious Lord, that He would not forget them, but would teach
them how to live thenceforward in the light.

(End of Genesis B)


(ll. 852-866) Then came Almighty God, the Glorious Prince,
walking in the garden after the midday, according to His will.
Our Saviour, the Merciful Father, would fain discover what His
children did.  He knew their glory was gone which formerly He
gave them.  Sadly they stole away into the darkness of the trees,
bereft of glory, and hid themselves in the shadows when they
heard the holy voice of God, and were afraid.  Then the Lord of
heaven began to call the warden of the world, and bade His son
come quickly unto Him.  And he made answer unto God, and spake of
his nakedness with shame:

(ll. 867-871) "I will clothe my nakedness with a garment, my dear
Lord, and cover my shame with leaves.  My heart is troubled and
cast down within me.  I dare not come before Thy presence, for I
am naked."


XV

(ll. 872-881) And straightway God made answer unto him: "Tell me,
My son, why stealest thou away into the darkness with shame?
Thou didst not formerly feel shame before Me, but only joy.
Wherefore art thou humbled and abashed, knowing sorrow, covering
thy body with leaves, sad of heart and wretched in thy woe,
saying thou needest clothing, except thou hast eaten of the fruit
of the tree which I forbade thee?"

(ll. 882-886) And Adam again made answer: "My Lord!  this woman,
this lovely maid, gave me the fruit into my hand, and I took it
in trespass against Thee.  And now I clearly bear the token upon
me and know the more of sorrow."

(ll. 887-895) Then Almighty God questioned Eve: "Of what avail,
My daughter, were My abundant blessings, the new-created Paradise
and pleasant growing things, that thou shouldest stretch thy
hands with yearning unto the tree, and pluck the apples growing
on its boughs, and eat the deadly fruit in trespass against Me,
and give to Adam, when by My word it was forbidden to you both?"

(ll. 895-902) And the lovely woman, put to shame, made answer:
"The serpent, the deadly snake, with fair words tempted me, and
eagerly enticed me to that deed of sin and evil appetite, until I
basely did the deed and wrought the wrong, despoiled the tree
within the wood, as was not right, and ate the fruit."

(ll. 903-905) Then our Saviour, the Almighty Lord, decreed unto
the serpent, the guilty snake, an endless wandering, and said:

(ll. 906-917) "All thy life upon thy belly shalt thou go to and
fro upon the fields of the broad earth, accursed, so long as life
and spirit dwell within thee.  Dust shalt thou eat all the days
of thy life for the grievous evil thou hast wrought.  The woman
shall loathe and hate thee under heaven.  Her foot shall crush
thy head, and thou shalt bruise her heel anew.  There shall be
strife between your seed for ever, while the world standeth under
heaven.  Now thou knowest clearly, thou foul tempter, what thy
life shall be."


XVI

(ll. 918-924) And unto Eve God spake in wrath: "Turn thee from
joy!  Thou shalt live under man's dominion, sore smitten with
fear before him.  With bitter sorrow shalt thou expiate thy sin,
waiting for death, bringing forth sons and daughters in the world
with grief and tears and lamentation."

(ll. 925-938) And on Adam the Eternal God, Author of life,
pronounced an evil doom: "Thou shalt seek another home, a joyless
dwelling.  Naked and needy shalt thou suffer exile, shorn of thy
glory.  Thy soul and body shall be cleft asunder.  Lo!  thou hast
sinned a grievous sin.  Therefore shalt thou labour, winning thy
portion on the earth by toil, eating thy bread in the sweat of
thy brow while thou dwellest here, until that grim disease, which
first thou tasted in the apple, shall grip hard at thy heart.  So
shalt thou die."

(ll. 939-951) Lo!  now we know how our afflictions came upon us,
and mortal misery!  Then the Lord of glory, our Creator, clothed
them with garments, and bade them cover their shame with their
first raiment.  He drove them forth from Paradise into a narrower
life.  By God's command a holy angel, with a sword of fire,
closed fast that pleasant home of peace and joy behind them.  No
wicked, sinful man may walk therein, but the warden has strength
and power, dear unto God in virtue, who guards that life of
glory.

(ll. 952-964) Yet the Almighty Father would not take away from
Adam and from Eve, at once, all goodly things, though He withdrew
His favour from them.  But for their comfort He left the sky
above them adorned with shining stars, gave them wide-stretching
fields, and bade the earth and sea and all their teeming
multitudes to bring forth fruits to serve man's earthly need.
After their sin they dwelt in a realm more sorrowful, a home and
native land less rich in all good things than was their first
abode, wherefrom He drove them out after their sin.

(ll. 965-987) Then, according to the word of God, Adam and Eve
begat children, as God had bidden.  To them were born two goodly
sons, Abel and Cain: the books tell us how these brothers, first
of toilers, gained wealth and goods and store of food.  One, the
first-born, tilled the fields; the other aided with his father's
cattle; and after many days they both brought offerings to God.
The Prince of angels, Lord of every creature, lifted up His eyes
on Abel's offering and would not look upon the gift of Cain.  And
the heart of Cain was bitter; wrath shook his soul, and envy
burned within him.  Then with his hands Cain wrought a deed of
shame, struck down his brother Abel, and poured his blood upon
the ground.  The earth drank in his blood poured out in murder.

(ll. 987-1001) After that mortal blow came woe and tribulation.
From that shoot grew more and more a deadly bitter fruit, and the
boughs of sin stretched far and wide among the nations;
grievously the twigs of evil touched the sons of men (and do so
yet), and from them grew broad blades of wickedness.  With
lamentation must we tell that tale of evil fate, not without
cause.  Grievous the ruin the lovely woman wrought us by that
first of sins that ever men on earth had sinned against their
Maker since Adam first was filled with breath from the mouth of
God.


XVII

(ll. 1002-1005) Then the Lord of glory spake unto Cain, and asked
where Abel was.  Quickly the cursed fashioner of death made
answer unto Him:

(ll. 1006-1008) "I know not the coming or going of Abel, my
kinsman, his lot or portion; I was not my brother's keeper."

(ll. 1008-1021) And the Gracious Spirit, Lord of angels, made
answer unto him: "Why hast thou slain that faithful man thy
brother in thy wrath, and his blood calleth and crieth unto Me?
Accursed for ever, driven into exile, thou shalt be punished for
this deed of death!  The earth shall not yield thee of her
pleasant fruits for thy daily need, but by thy hands her soil is
stained with holy blood.  Therefore the green earth shall
withhold from thee her beauty and her delights.  In sadness and
dishonour shalt thou depart from thy home, because thou hast
slain thy brother, Abel.  Loathed of thy kinsmen, an exile and a
fugitive, shalt thou wander on the face of the earth."

(ll. 1022-1035) And Cain made answer unto Him: ... "I need not
look for pity in this world, High King of heaven, for I have lost
Thy love and favour and goodwill.  Weary the ways my feet must
wander, in dread of woe, whenever one shall meet me in my guilt,
near or far, and by his hate remind me of my brother's death.  I
shed his blood and poured his life-blood on the ground.  From
this day hast Thou cut me off from good!  Thou scourgest me from
home!  Some cruel foe shall slay me.  And I must needs go forth,
accursed, from Thy sight, O Lord!"

(ll. 1036-1043) And the Lord of victory said unto him: "Thou
needest not yet dread death, nor the pangs of death, though thou
shalt wander, far from kinsmen, with thy doom upon thee.  If any
man shall slay thee with his hands, on him shall fall a
seven-fold vengeance, and torment for that deed of sin."

(ll. 1043-1054) And God, the Lord of glory, set a mark upon him
and a token, lest any foe from far or near should dare to lift
his hand against him; and He bade him go forth in his guilt from
mother and kinsmen and from all his tribe.  Then with despairing
heart, a friendless exile, Cain departed out of the sight of God,
and chose a home and dwelling in the eastern lands, far from his
father's house; and there a comely maiden bare him children after
his kind.

(ll. 1055-1073) Enoch was first-born of the sons of Cain.  He
built a city with his kinsmen, the first of all those strongholds
under heaven which sword-girt men established; and in the city
sons were born to him.  Irad was first-born of the sons of Enoch;
and he begat children, and all the tribe and race of Cain
increased.  And after Irad Mahalaleel was warden of the treasure,
in his father's stead, until he died.  Then Methusael dispensed
the treasure to his brothers and his kinsmen, man for man, till,
full of many years, he died.

(ll. 1073-1081) And at his father's death Lamech succeeded to the
treasure and the household goods.  Two wives bare children to him
in his home, Adah and Zillah.  Now one of the sons of Lamech was
called Jabal; and he was first of all men by his skill to stir
the harp to music and its strings to song.


XVIII

(ll. 1082-1089) And there was also in that tribe another son of
Lamech, called Tubal Cain, a smith skilled in his craft.  He was
the first of all men on the earth to fashion tools of husbandry;
and far and wide the city-dwelling sons of men made use of bronze
and iron.

(ll. 1090-1103) Then to his two beloved wives, Adah and Zillah,
Lamech rehearsed a tale of shame: "I have struck down a kinsman
unto death!  I have defiled my hands with the blood of Cain!  I
smote down Enoch's father, slayer of Abel, and poured his blood
upon the ground.  Full well I know that for that mortal deed
shall come God's seven-fold vengeance.  With fearful torment
shall my deed of death and murder be requited, when I go hence."

(ll. 1104-1111) Then another son was born to Adam in Abel's
stead; and his name was Seth.  He was a righteous son and
blessed, a solace to his parents, his father and mother, Adam and
Eve.  And he filled the place of Abel in the world.  Then Adam
spake, the first of men:

(ll. 1111-1116) "The eternal God of victory, the Lord of life,
hath vouchsafed me another son in place of my beloved whom Cain
slew.  So our Lord hath stilled the sorrow of my heart.  To Him
be thanks!"

(ll. 1117-1127) Now, when Adam begat another son to be his heir,
that sturdy man had lived an hundred and thirty winters of this
life in the world.  The writings tell us that Adam increased his
tribe on earth, begetting sons and daughters eight hundred years.
And all the years of Adam were nine hundred and thirty winters,
and he died.

(ll. 1128-1142) And Seth succeeded Adam: at his father's death
the well-loved son possessed the treasure, and took himself a
wife.  And Seth lived an hundred and five winters in the world
and increased his tribe, begetting sons and daughters.  Enos was
first-born of the sons of Seth; and he was first of all the sons
of men to call upon the name of God since Adam, first a living
spirit, set foot on the green earth.  Seth prospered, eight
hundred and seven winters begetting sons and daughters.  And all
the years of Seth were nine hundred and twelve winters, and he
died.

(ll. 1143-1154) And after he went hence, and the earth received
the body of seed-bearing Seth, Enos was warden of the heritage.
Dear was he unto God!  He lived for ninety winters in the world,
and begat children.  And Cainan was first-born of the sons of
Enos.  Eight hundred and fifteen winters the man of wisdom lived,
at peace with God, begetting sons and daughters.  And all the
years of Enos were nine hundred and five winters, and he died.

(ll. 1155-1166) And after Enos Cainan ruled the tribe as lord and
leader.  He lived seventy winters, and begat a son.  An heir was
born unto his house, and his name was Mahalaleel.  Eight hundred
and forty winters Cainan lived, and increased his tribe.  And all
the years of the son of Enos were nine hundred and ten winters,
and he died, and his appointed days beneath the heavens were
fulfilled.


XIX

(ll. 1167-1180) And after Cainan Mahalaleel possessed the land
and treasure many a year.  The prince lived five-and-sixty
winters, and begat a son.  An heir was born unto his house, and
his kinsmen called him Jared, as I have heard.  Mahalaleel lived
long, enjoying bliss on earth, the joys of men, and worldly
treasure.  And all the years of Mahalaleel were eight hundred
five-and-ninety winters, and he died, and gave the land and rule
unto his son.

(ll. 1180-1196) A long time Jared dealt out gold to men.  He was
a righteous prince, a noble earl, dear to his kinsmen  He lived
an hundred five-and-sixty winters in the world, and, when her
time was come, his wife brought forth her first-born, a goodly
son.  And his name was Enoch.  Eight hundred years his father
lived, and increased his tribe.  And all the years of Jared were
nine hundred five-and-sixty winters, and he died, and gave the
land and rule unto his son, the wise and well-loved prince.

(ll. 1197-1217) And Enoch ruled the folk, led them in ways of
peace, and no wise let his sway and power lessen, while he was
lord over his kinsmen.  Now Enoch prospered and increased his
tribe three hundred years.  And God, the Lord of heaven, was
gracious unto him!  In his natural body he entered into heavenly
joy and the glory of God, dying no mortal death as men do here,
the young and old, what time God taketh from them wealth and
substance and earthly treasure and their life; but with the King
of angels he departed still alive out of this fleeting life, in
the same vestments which his soul received before his mother bare
him.  He left the people to his eldest son.  And all the years of
Enoch were three hundred five-and-sixty winters, and he died.

(ll. 1217-1224) Then Methuselah held sway among his kinsmen, and
longest of all men enjoyed the pleasures of this world.  He begat
a multitude of sons and daughters before his death.  And all the
years of Methuselah were nine hundred and seventy winters, and he
died.

(ll. 1224-1236) And Lamech, his son, succeeded him and kept the
treasure.  Long time he ruled the land.  He lived an hundred and
two winters, and begat children.  And the lord and leader of the
folk lived five hundred five-and-ninety years, enjoying many
winters under heaven, ruling the folk with wisdom.  And Lamech
increased his tribe, begetting sons and daughters.  He called the
name of the first-born Noah; and Noah ruled the land after the
death of Lamech.

(ll. 1237-1247) Now Noah, the lord of men, lived five hundred
winters, as the books say, and begat children.  The first-born
son of Noah was Shem, and the second Ham, and the third Japheth.
And the folk grew in number under heaven, and the multitude of
the race of men increased throughout the earth.  The tribe of
Seth, the well-loved prince, was still exceeding dear to God, and
blessed in His love!


XX

(ll. 1248-1254) Then the sons of God began to take them wives
from the tribe of Cain, a cursed folk, and the sons of men chose
them wives from among that people, the fair and winsome daughters
of that sinful race, against the will of God.  Then the Lord of
heaven lifted up His voice in wrath against mankind, and said:

(ll. 1255-1262) "Lo!  I have not been unmindful of the sons of
men, but the tribe of Cain hath sorely angered Me.  The sons of
Seth have stirred My wrath against them; they have taken them
wives from among the daughters of My foes.  Woman's beauty and
woman's grace and the eternal fiend have taken hold upon this
people who dwelt of old in peace."

(ll. 1263-1284) An hundred and twenty numbered winters in the
world that fated folk were busied in evil.  Then the Lord
resolved to punish those faithless spirits, and slay the sinful
giant sons, undear to God, those huge, unholy scathers, loathsome
to the Lord.  The King of victory beheld how great was the
wickedness of men on earth, and saw that they were bold in sin
and full of wiles.  He resolved to bring destruction on the
tribes of men, and smite mankind with heavy hand.  It repented
Him exceedingly that He had made man, and the first of men, when
He created Adam.  He said that for the sins of men He would lay
waste the earth, and all that was upon the earth, destroying
every living thing that breathed the breath of life.  All this
would the Lord destroy in the days that were coming on the sons
of men.

(ll. 1285-1295) But Noah, the son of Lamech, was good and dear to
God, exceeding blessed, just and meek.  And the Lord knew that
virtue flourished in the heart of Noah.  Wherefore God, the Holy
Lord of every creature, spake unto Noah, declaring His wrath and
vengeance on the sons of men.  For He saw that the earth was full
of wickedness, and its broad and fertile meadows filled with sin
and defiled with uncleanness.  And the Lord our God spake unto
Noah, and said:

(ll. 1296-1313) "I will destroy this people with a flood, man and
every living thing that the air and the seas bring forth and
nourish, birds of the air and beasts of the field.  But thou, and
thy sons with thee, shall have mercy when the black waters, the
dark, destroying floods, shall overwhelm the hosts of sinful men.
Begin to build thee a ship, a mighty seahouse, and in it make
abiding-room for many, and set a rightful place for every tribe
of earth.  Build floors within the ark, dividing it in stories.
And thou shalt build it three hundred cubits long and fifty
cubits wide and thirty cubits high, and fasten it firmly against
the might of the waves.  And thou shalt take within the ark the
seed of every living thing, and the offspring of all flesh upon
the earth.  And the ark must hold them all."

(ll. 1314-1319) And Noah did according as God commanded him.  He
hearkened unto the Holy King of heaven, and began straightway to
build the ark, a mighty sea-chest.  And unto his kinsmen he
proclaimed destruction coming upon men, and bitter vengeance.
And they heeded him not.

(ll. 1320-1326) Then after many winters the Faithful Lord beheld
the greatest of ocean-houses, Noah's vessel, towering up, made
tight with the best of pitch within and without against the
floods.  And it was best of all its kind, growing more hard the
more the rough waves and the black sea-streams beat up against
it.


XXI

(l. 1327) Then our Lord said unto Noah:

(ll. 1328-1355) "I give thee My pledge, dearest of men, that thou
mayest go thy way, thou and the seed of every living thing which
thou shalt ferry through the deep water for many a day in the
bosom of the ship.  Lead on board the ark, as I bid thee, thy
household, thy wife and thy three sons, and thy sons' wives with
thee.  And take within that sea-home seven of every kind of
living thing that serve as food for men, and two of every other
kind.  Likewise of all the fruits of the earth take food for the
company upon thy ship, who with thee shall be saved from the
flood!  Care well for every creature until I shall cause food to
grow again beneath the heavens for the survivors of the ocean
floods.  Depart now with thy household and thy host of guests,
embarking on the ship.  I know that thou art good, and of a
steadfast mind.  Thou art worthy of grace and mercy, thou and thy
children.  Lo!  for seven nights I shall let the rains descend
upon the face of the broad earth.  Forty days will I visit My
wrath upon men, with a deluge destroying the riches of the world
and the tribes of men, save what shall be upon the ark when the
black floods begin to rise."

(ll. 1356-1371) And Noah departed, as the Lord commanded,
embarking his household upon the ark, leading up his sons into
the ship, and their wives with them.  All that Almighty God would
have for seed went in under the roof of the ark unto their
food-giver, even according as the Mighty Lord of hosts gave
bidding by His word.  And the Warden of that heavenly kingdom,
the God of victories, locked the door of the ocean-house behind
him with His hands, and our Lord blessed all within the ark with
His blessing.  Now Noah, the son of Lamech, had lived six hundred
winters, wise and full of years, when he went up with the young
men, his beloved sons, into the ark, as God gave bidding.

(ll. 1371-1399) Then the Lord sent the rains from heaven, and
caused the black sea-streams to roar, and the fountains of the
deep to overflow the world.  The seas surged up over the barriers
of the shore.  Mighty in His wrath was He who rules the waters!
And He overwhelmed and covered the mortal sons of sin with a
black deluge, laying waste the native land and homes of men.  God
visited their offences upon them.  Forty days and forty nights
the sea laid hold on that doomed folk.  Dire was that disaster
and deadly unto men.  The stormy surges of the King of glory
quenched the life from out the bodies of that sinful host.  The
flood, raging beneath the heavens, covered over all high hills
throughout the spacious earth, and lifted up the ark from the
earth upon the bosom of the waters, and all within the ark, whom
the Lord our God had blessed when He locked the door of the ship.
Then far and wide that best of ocean-houses and its burden
floated beneath the heavens over the compass of the sea.  The
raging terrors of the deep might not lay hold on ship or
mariners, but Holy God ferried them upon the sea and shielded
them.  Fifteen cubits deep upon the hills the deluge lay.  That
was a grievous fate!

(ll. 1400-1406) But no harm came nigh unto the ark, save that it
was lifted up to heaven, when the flood destroyed all creatures
on the earth; but Holy God, the Eternal King, the Lord of heaven,
stern of heart, preserved the ark when He unleashed the ocean
currents and their changing streams.


XXII

(ll. 1407-1412) And God, the Lord of victory, was mindful of
those mariners, of the son of Lamech, and all the living things
which the Author of life and light had locked within the bosom of
the ship against the waters' might.  The Lord of hosts guided the
warriors by His word across the world.

(ll. 1412-1421) Then the welling floods began to lessen and the
black tides ebbed beneath the heavens.  The Just God turned the
waters again from His children and stilled the downpour of the
rains.  Foamy-necked the ship fared on an hundred and fifty
nights beneath the heavens, after the flood had lifted up that
best of vessels with its well-nailed sides--until at last the
appointed number of the days of wrath were passed away.

(ll. 1421-1430) And the ark of Noah, the greatest of seahomes,
with its burden, rested high upon the hills which are called
Armenia.  There the holy son of Lamech waited many days for God's
faithful covenant to be fulfilled, when the Warden of life, the
Lord Almighty, would give him respite from the perils he had
suffered while the black waves bore him far and wide upon the
waters over the spacious earth.

(ll. 1431-1448) The floods receded, and those sea-tossed men,
together with their wives, longed for the hour when they might
leave their narrow home, and step across the well-nailed sides
upon the shore, and from their prison lead out their possessions.
And Noah, the helmsman of the ark, made trial whether the
seafloods yet were ebbing under heaven.  After many days, while
the high hills yet harboured the seed and treasure of the tribes
of earth, the son of Lamech let a dusky raven fly forth from the
ark over the deep flood.  And Noah was sure that in its need, if
so be it should find no land upon this journey, the raven would
return to him again within the ark across the wide water.  But
Noah's hope failed him!  Exulting the raven perched upon the
floating bodies of the dead; the black-winged bird would not
return.

(ll. 1449-1463) And seven days after the dusky raven he let a
grey dove fly forth from the ark across the deep water, making
trial whether the high and foaming floods had yet receded from
any region of the green earth.  Widely she sought her heart's
desire, circling afar, but nowhere finding rest.  Because of the
floods she might not set foot upon the land, nor settle on the
branch of any tree because of the ocean-streams.  The high hills
were covered by the deep.  And so at evening over the dusky wave
the wild bird sought the ark, settling hungry and weary into the
hands of that holy man.

(ll. 1464-1476) And again after seven days a second dove was sent
forth from the ark.  The wild bird circled widely till she found
a refuge and a pleasant resting-place, and settled in a tree.
Blithe of heart, she rejoiced that in her weariness she might
find rest upon its pleasant branches.  She shook her feathers and
flew back with a gift, bearing as she flew a branch of an olive
tree with its green blades.  And the prince of shipmen knew that
comfort was at hand, and a requital of their toilsome voyage.

(ll. 1476-1482) And again after seven days the blessed man sent
forth a third wild dove.  And she flew not back unto the ark, but
came to land and the green forests.  Her heart was glad; never
again would she appear under the black roof of the ark.  Nor was
there need!


XXIII

(ll. 1483-1484) Then our Lord, the Warden of the heavenly
kingdom, with holy word spake unto Noah:

(ll. 1485-1492) "For thee again on earth a fair abiding-place is
founded, blessings upon the land, and rest from far sea-wandering.
Depart in peace out of the ark; go forth upon the bosom of the earth.
And from the high ship lead thy household, and all the living things
which graciously I shielded against the flood, so long as the sea
held sway and covered thy third home."

(ll. 1493-1511) And Noah hearkened unto God with great rejoicing,
and did according as the Voice commanded.  And he went out upon
the shore, and led forth from the ark all who had survived that
time of woe.  Then Noah, wise of counsel, began to offer
sacrifice to God.  And for an offering he took a part of all his
goods which God had given him to enjoy, and, great in wisdom and
in glory, made sacrifice to God, the King of angels.  And
straightway our Lord made known that He had blessed Noah, and
Noah's children, because he had offered that thank-offering, and
in his youth by good deeds had deserved the bounteous mercies
which Almighty God in majesty bestowed upon him.  And God, the
Lord of glory, spake unto Noah and said:

(ll. 1512-1531) "Be fruitful and multiply, enjoying honour,
delighting in peace.  Fill all the earth with your increase.  To
you is given the home of your fathers, dominion over the fish of
the sea, and the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field,
over all the green earth and its teeming herds.  Never shall ye
eat in blood your shameful feasts through sin defiled with blood.
For most he injureth himself and his soul's honour whoso shall
slay another with the sword.  Verily!  in no wise shall his heart
have joy in his reward!  For many times more heavily will I
avenge man's life upon his murderer, because his sword hath
prospered in violence and blood, and his hands in death.  Man was
first fashioned in the image of God.  Each hath the form of God
and of the angels, whoso will keep My holy laws.

(ll. 1532-1542) "Be fruitful and multiply, enjoying grace on
earth and every pleasant thing.  Fill all the regions of the
earth with your increase, your issue, and your seed.  And unto
you I give My covenant that never again will I bring the waters
upon the earth or a flood on the wide-stretching land.  Oft shall
ye behold the token of My promise in the heavens, when I show
forth My rainbow, that I will keep this covenant with men while
the world standeth."

(ll. 1543-1554) And the wise son of Lamech, the warden of wealth,
came forth from the ship as the flood receded, and his three sons
with him.  And their four wives were called Percoba, and Olla,
and Olliva, and Ollivani.  The Faithful Lord had saved them to
survive the flood.  And Noah's stout-hearted sons were Shem and
Ham, and the third was Japheth.  From them sprang many peoples,
and all the earth was filled with the sons of men.

(ll. 1555-1561) Then a second time Noah began to establish a home
with his kinsmen, and to till the earth for food.  He toiled and
wrought and planted a vineyard and sowed seed, and laboured that
the green earth might bring forth her shining harvests, her
gleaming crops, in every season.

(ll. 1562-1576) And it came to pass upon a time that the blessed
man lay drunk with wine in his dwelling, and slumbered heavy with
feasting, and cast off his robe from his body, as was not seemly,
and lay there naked of limb.  Little did he know what evil plight
was his in his dwelling, while drunkenness had hold upon his
heart within him in its holy house.  But his soul was fast bound
in slumber, so that in his stupor he might not cover himself with
a garment, nor hide his shame, as was decreed for man and woman
what time the thane of glory with a sword of fire behind our
first great parents locked the gates of life.

(ll. 1577-1588) Then Ham, the son of Noah, went in where his lord
lay sleeping, and would not look with reverence upon his father,
nor cover his shame.  But he laughed, and told his brothers how
their lord lay sleeping in his home.  And straightway, covering
their faces with their cloaks, they went in unto the well-beloved
to bring him succour.  For both were good of heart, both Shem and
Japheth.

(ll. 1588-1603) Then the son of Lamech awoke from his slumber,
and learned that Ham had failed to show him reverence or love
when he had greatest need.  And the holy man was grieved in his
heart, and set a curse upon his son, saying that Ham should be an
outcast under heaven and servant to his kinsmen on the earth.
And the curse lay heavy upon him and on all his tribe.  And Noah
and his sons as freemen ruled a wide-stretching realm for three
hundred and fifty winters of this life, after the flood.  Then he
went hence.  And his sons possessed his wealth, and begat
children and prospered.

(ll. 1603-1616) Children were born unto Japheth, a glad
hearth-band of sons and daughters.  He was a godly man, enjoying
bliss and blessing with his children, until his soul within his
breast, ready to depart, must needs go forth unto the glory of
God.  And Gormer, Japheth's son, dispensed his father's treasure
among his friends and kinsmen, near and dear.  And no little
portion of the earth was filled with their increase.

(ll. 1616-1628) Likewise sons were born unto Ham.  The names of
the eldest were called Cush and Ham, two goodly youths, his
first-born sons.  And Cush was ruler of his tribe, dispensing joy
and worldly wealth and treasure unto his brothers in his father's
stead, after Ham died, and his soul departed from this earthly
body.  He ruled his tribe and gave them laws until his days were
run.  Then he gave over earthly riches and sought another life
and his Father's bosom.

(ll. 1628-1636) And the first-born son of Cush, a far-famed man,
held his ancestral seat.  The writings tell us that of all men
then alive his strength and power were greatest.  He was lord of
the kingdom of Babylon, and first of princes to exalt her glory.
He enlarged her borders and brought her fame.


XXV

(ll. 1637-1639) Now there was yet one common tongue for all men
on the earth.  And a great tribe was born of the stem of Ham and
a mighty people spreading far and wide.

(ll. 1640-1660) And Shem begat a host of free-born sons and
daughters, and, after many winters, went to his last rest.  In
that tribe men were good!  One of the sons of Shem was Eber, and
from him sprang a countless race which all men dwelling in the
earth call Hebrews.  They departed out of the east, taking with
them all their substance, their cattle and their goods.  That was
a dauntless folk!  The heroes sought a roomier land, a wandering
folk, in mighty multitudes, and chose at last a fixed abode
wherein to settle.  Far and wide in days of old the leaders of
that people, with their well-loved men, possessed the land of
Shinar, a land of green plains and pleasant valleys.  And at that
time they prospered greatly, and had abundance of all good
things.

(ll. 1661-1678) Then many a man besought his friend, and one
stout warrior urged another, that, before their multitude and the
tribes of their people should be scattered again over the face of
the whole earth in search of land, they should build a city to
their glory and rear a tower unto the stars of heaven, to be a
sign that they had sought the land of Shinar, where of old the
mighty leaders of the folk had lived at ease.  And they sought
out men for this work and deed of sin, in rash pride showing
forth their strength.  Greedy for glory, they reared a city with
their hands, and raised a ladder up to heaven, and in their vain
strength built a wall of stone beyond the measure of men.

(ll. 1678-1701) Then came Holy God to look upon the work of the
children of men, the citadel and the tower which the sons of Adam
were beginning to rear unto heaven.  Stern of heart, the King
reproved their folly, and in His wrath confounded the tongues of
the dwellers of earth, and they might not prosper in their
speech.  Then the leaders of the work in pride of strength met
together about the tower in many bands.  But no one band could
understand another.  And they left off to build the wall of
stone, and were wretchedly sundered into tribes divided by their
speech.  And every tribe became alien to every other tribe, when
the Lord in His might sundered the speech of men.  So the divided
sons of men were scattered on four ways in search of land.  And
behind them the steadfast tower of stone, and the high citadel,
stood unfinished together in the land of Shinar.

(ll. 1702-1718) Now the tribe of Shem increased and flourished
under heaven.  And a certain man of that tribe, of thoughtful
heart and given to virtue, had noble children.  Two goodly sons
were born to him, and bred in Babylon, great-hearted princes
named Abraham and Haran.  And the Lord of angels was their guide
and friend.  Now Haran had a noble son, whose name was Lot.  And
Abraham and Lot throve excellently before the Lord as was their
nature from their elders.  Wherefore men proclaim their virtues
far and wide upon the earth.


XXVI

(ll. 1719-1729) Then was the time fulfilled, and Abraham brought
a wife unto his home, a fair and comely woman to his dwelling.
And her name was Sarah, as the writings tell us.  Many a winter
they enjoyed the world, prospering in peace for many a year.  But
it was not given unto Abraham that his comely wife should bear
him children, or an heir unto his house.

(ll. 1730-1743) And Abraham's father went out with his household,
and with all their substance, journeying through the realm of the
Chaldeans.  Fain would the wise lord with his kinsfolk seek the
land of Canaan.  And Abraham and Lot, his kinsmen, dear to God,
departed with him out of that country.  The noble sons of men
chose them a dwelling in the land of Haran, and their wives with
them.  And Abraham's father, the faithful, died in that land.
And all his years were two hundred and five winters, and he
departed, full of years, to see God.

(ll. 1744-1766) Then the Holy Warden of the heavenly kingdom,
Eternal God, said unto Abraham: "Go forth from this place, and
lead thy household and thy cattle with thee.  Get thee out of the
land of Haran, and from thy father's home.  Journey as I bid
thee, dearest of men; hearken to My teachings, and seek the land
of green, wide-stretching plains, which I shall show thee.
Blessed shalt thou live in My protection.  If any of the dwellers
of earth greet thee with evil, him will I curse for thy sake; and
I will set My anger upon him and My enduring wrath.  But unto
them that honour thee will I be gracious and give them all their
heart's desire.  Through thee all nations dwelling in the earth
shall have My peace and friendship, My bliss and blessing in the
world.  The number of thy tribe, thy sons and daughters, shall be
increased beneath the heavens, until the earth and many a land
shall be filled with thy seed."

(ll. 1767-1786) And Abraham, great in virtue and blessed with
gold and silver, departed with much substance out of the land of
Haran, leading his herds and his possessions, even unto the
borders of the Egyptians, according as our God, the Lord of
victory, commanded by His word, and sought a dwelling in the land
of Canaan.  Beloved of God, he came with gladness to that land,
and his wife with him, the dear companion of his bed, and the
wife of his brother's son.  And his years were five-and-seventy
winters when he went out from the land of Haran, and from his
kinsmen.  And Abraham was mindful of the words of the Almighty
Father, and journeyed through all the borders of that people, at
his Lord's behest, to view the land afar, and came at last in
safety, with undaunted heart, to Sichem and the Canaanites.  And
the Just Lord, the King of angels, revealed Himself to Abraham
and said:

(ll. 1787-1790) "This is the roomy land, the beautiful, green
realm, adorned with increase, which I will give thy seed to
rule."

(ll. 1790-1804) And there the prince builded an altar to the
Lord, and offered up a sacrifice to God, the Lord of life,
Protector of all souls.  And Abraham departed again out of the
east to view with his eyes this best of lands (and he was mindful
of the gracious promise which the Heavenly Warden, the Lord of
victory, had given by His holy word) until they came with their
multitudes unto a village called Bethel.  Out of the east their
leader, blithe of heart, and his brother's son, Godfearing men,
journeyed with all their substance through far-famed lands, and
over high, steep hills, and chose a dwelling where the fields
seemed wondrous fair.


XXVII

(ll. 1805-1810) And again Abraham builded an altar, calling
earnestly on God, and offered sacrifice unto the Lord of life.
And God was gracious, and with unsparing hand granted him reward
upon the altar.

(ll. 1811-1823) And for a time thereafter the prince abode in his
dwellings, and his wife with him, enjoying all good things, until
a grievous famine fell upon the tribes of Canaan, and bitter
hunger, grim as death to men within their homes.  Then Abraham,
wise of heart, and chosen of the Lord, betook him into Egypt to
seek a place of refuge.  The faithful hero fled from that
affliction; too bitter was the woe.  And, in the wisdom of his
heart, when he beheld the gabled palaces and high-walled towns of
the Egyptians gleaming brightly, Abraham began to speak unto his
wife and counsel her:

(ll. 1824-1843) "Lo!  many a proud Egyptian shall behold thy
beauty, maiden of elfin grace!  And if one look upon thee with
desire, thinking thou art my wife, I fear lest, in his longing
for thy love, some foe may slay me with the sword.  Therefore,
Sarah, say thou art my sister and my kin, if any stranger
question what the bond may be between us two of alien race and
distant home.  Conceal the truth!  So shalt thou save my life if
God, our Lord Almighty, who sent us on this journey, that we
might strive for honour and advantage among the Egyptians, will
grant me His protection as of old, and longer life."

(ll. 1844-1872) So Abraham, the dauntless earl, came journeying
with all his substance into Egypt, where men were alien to him
and friends unknown.  And many a proud earl, great in glory,
found the woman fair; to many a bold thanes of the king she
seemed of royal beauty; and this they told their lord.  They
little thought of any fairer maid, but praised the winsome
loveliness of Sarah more highly to their prince, until he bade
them bring the lovely woman to his hall.  And the lord of men,
dispenser of treasure, bade them show honour upon Abraham.  But
the Lord God visited His anger upon Pharaoh because of his love
of the woman; bitterly the prince of men atoned, and all his
household.  He knew why the Lord afflicted him with plagues!
Then the prince of Egypt called Abraham before him, who was sore
afraid; and he gave him his wife again and his consort, and bade
him seek friends elsewhere, other princes and another folk.  And
he bade his thanes and serving men conduct him, uninjured and
with honour, out from among that people, that he might be at
peace.

(ll. 1873-1889) So Abraham took his possessions and went out from
the land of Egypt.  Brave men conveyed the maiden, the bride with
rings adorned, and they led their flocks and earthly riches unto
Bethel to their olden dwellings again, wife and wealth and
worldly treasure.  They began to build there, to found a city,
and renew their halls and establish a home.  And they builded an
altar in the plain near that which Abraham had built aforetime to
his God, when he came out of the west.  And there the blessed man
of noble heart gave praise anew unto the name of the Eternal
Lord, offering sacrifice unto the Prince of angels, and giving
thanks abundantly unto the Lord of life for all His grace and
mercy.

(ll. 1890-1900) Then Abraham and Lot abode in that place, having
the fullness of their desires, enjoying bliss, until no longer
could they prosper in that land together, with their possessions,
but those righteous men must needs seek elsewhere some roomier
dwelling-place.  For often quarrels rose between the followers of
these faithful men, and strife among their shepherds.  Then holy
Abraham, mindful of honour, spake fairly unto Lot:

(ll. 1900-1919) "I am thy father's brother in blood kinship, and
thou my brother's son.  No strife shall rise, no feud grow up,
between us two.  God will not suffer that.  We two are kinsmen;
naught else shall there be between us save goodness and enduring
love.  Now, Lot, take thought how strong men dwell about our
borders, mighty tribes with thanes and allies, men of valour, the
tribe of the Canaanites and the tribe of the Perizzites.  They
will not give us of their land!  Therefore let us go forth from
this place, and seek out roomier fields.  I give good counsel,
son of Haran, for us both, and speak the truth.  I give thee
choice, my son!  Take thought, and ponder in thy heart on which
hand thou wilt bend thy course, thou and thy cattle.  The choice
is thine!"

(ll. 1920-1944) Then Lot departed to view the green earth and the
land that lies by Jordan.  And it was watered with rivers, and
covered with pleasant fruits, bright with running streams, and
like the Paradise of God before our Lord gave over Sodom and
Gomorrah unto fire and black flame, because of the sins of men.
And there the son of Haran chose him a dwelling and a settlement
in the city of Sodom.  And thither he took from Bethel all his
substance, rings and household treasure and riches and twisted
gold.  And he abode by Jordan many a year.  The place was fair,
but those that dwelt therein were impious and hateful unto God.
The race of Sodomites were bold in sin, in deeds perverse,
working eternal folly.  Lot would not adopt the customs of that
people, but turned him from their practices, their sin and shame,
though he must needs dwell in the land.  He kept him pure and
spotless and of patient heart among that people, mindful of God's
commands, most like as if he knew not what that nation did.

(ll. 1945-1959) And Abraham abode thenceforth in the dwellings of
the Canaanites.  And the Lord of men, the King of angels, was his
defender, granting him his heart's desires and worldly wealth and
love and favour.  Wherefore the tribes of men, the children of
baptism, exalt his praise full widely under heaven.  He served
the Lord with gladness while he lived on earth, holy and wise of
heart.  Never need any man lack shelter or defence, nor be afraid
and fearful before God, whoso, in return for His protection, with
discerning heart, with wit and word and understanding, in thought
and deed will serve Him till his death!


XXVIII

(ll. 1960-1972) Then, as I have heard, Chedorlaomer, king of the
Elamires, a bold folk-captain, marshalled an army, and Amraphel
of Shinar and a mighty host were joined with him.  Four kings
with a great multitude departed into the south against Sodom and
Gomorrah.  And all the land about Jordan was overrun with armed
men and hostile bands.  Many a trembling maiden, pale with fear,
must needs endure a foe's embrace.  Many a warrior perished, sick
with wounds, guarding their wives and treasure.

(ll. 1973-1989) Against them from the south five kings went forth
to war with battle-hosts and marching squadrons.  Fain would they
guard the city of Sodom against the foe.  Twelve winters long
that folk had given toll and tribute to the Northmen, and would
no more enrich the lord of Elam with their treasure, but they
rebelled against him.  Onward the hosts advanced, intent on
death.  (Loud sang the javelins.)  Amid the spears the blackbird,
dewy-feathered, croaked in hope of carrion.  In multitudes, with
steadfast hearts, the warriors hastened till the hosts were
gathered from afar, from south and north, helmeted men.

(ll. 1989-2003) Then was hard hand-play; crashing of weapons,
storming of death-darts, tumult of battle.  From out the sheaths
men snatched their ring-decked, keen-edged swords.  There might
an earl have his fill of fighting, whoso was not yet sated with
war.  The Northmen smote the people of the south.  In the shock
of shields the men of Sodom and Gomorrah, dispensers of gold,
lost many a well-loved comrade.  And they fled away from the
place of battle and saved their lives.  Behind them, slain with
spears and smitten with the swordedge, their well-loved comrades,
sons of princes, fell in death.

(ll. 2003-2017) And the lord of Elam had the victory, and held
the place of battle; and those who escaped the sword fled away to
seek a stronghold.  The foemen took their gold and sacked their
splendid treasure-cities, Sodom and Gomorrah.  Women were torn
from their sheltering homes, widow and maid, bereft of friends.
And the foe led Abraham's kinsman captive out of the city of
Sodom, with all his substance.  But truly may we tell these war
wolves' fate after the battle, boasting their victory, leading
Lot captive away, and with him the goods of the people and gold
of the Southmen.


XXIX

(ll. 2018-2038) For a certain man who survived the battle and the
sword came running unto Abraham, the Hebrew prince, and told him
the disaster, the fate of Lot, and how the men of Sodom, and
their strength, were sorely smitten.  And Abraham told these
tidings to his friends; the faithful man besought his well-loved
comrades, Aner and Mamre and Eshcol, to bear him aid, saying that
it was grievous to his heart and greatest of all sorrows, that
his brother's son should suffer thraldom.  He bade those valiant
men devise a plan to free his kinsman, and his wife with him.
And quickly the three brothers spake, and healed the sorrow of
his heart with manful words, and pledged their faith to Abraham
to aid him, and avenge his wrath upon his foes, or fall in death.

(ll. 2039-2059) Then the holy man bade his hearth-retainers take
their weapons.  Three hundred and eighteen wielders of the ashen
spear he gathered, loyal-hearted men, of whom he knew that each
would stoutly bear his linden shield to battle.  And Abraham went
out, and the three earls who had pledged their faith, together
with a great company of their people.  He would fain redeem his
kinsman, Lot, from his distress.  Brave were the warriors,
stoutly bearing their bucklers upon the march.  And when these
war-wolves had journeyed nigh unto the camp, the son of Terah,
wise of heart, bespake his captains (great was his need that they
should wage grim war on either flank, and hard hand-play against
the foe) and said that easily the Holy, Everlasting Lord could
speed their fortunes in the spear-strife.

(ll. 2060-2083) Then, in the shades of night, as I have heard,
the warriors dared the battle.  In the camp rose din of shields
and spears, death of bowmen, crash of battle arrows.  Bitterly
the sharp spears pierced the hearts of men.  In throngs their
foemen, warriors and comrades, fell in death, where laughing they
had borne away the spoil.  And victory and glory of war forsook
the strife of the Northmen.  No twisted gold did Abraham offer in
ransom for his brother's son, but battle; he smote and slew the
foe in war.  And the Lord of heaven smote in his behalf.  Four
armies fled, the kings and captains of the folk.  Behind them lay
the goodly host of hearth-retainers, cold in death, and in their
track lay those who sacked the homes of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
bore away the young men and the gold.  Lot's uncle gave them grim
requital!  And the lords of the army of Elam, shorn of their
glory, continued in flight until they came nigh unto Damascus.

(ll. 2083-2095) Then Abraham betook him to the track of their
retreat, and beheld the flight of the foe.  Lot was redeemed, and
his possessions; the women returned with joy.  Far and wide upon
the field of slaughter the birds were tearing at the bodies of
those foemen of the free.  And Abraham brought the treasure of
the Southmen, their wives and children, unto their homes again,
and maidens to their kinsmen. Never did any man of living men
with tiny band go forth more worthily to battle than those who
rushed against that mighty host.


XXX

(ll. 2096-2106) Southward the tidings of battle were borne to the
people of Sodom: news of their fierce foes' flight.  The lord of
the folk, bereft of earls and desolate of friends, went out unto
Abraham, to meet him.  And with him journeyed Salem's
treasure-warden, Melchizedek the mighty, the bishop of the folk.
He came with gifts, gave Abraham fair greeting, the lord of armed
men, and blessed him with God's blessing, and said:

(ll. 2107-2120) "Well hast thou borne thee among men, before His
eyes who gave thee glory in the battle--that is, God the Lord,
who brake the power of thy foes, and let thee hew thy way to
safety with the sword, regain the spoil, and fell thine enemies.
They perished in the track of their retreat.  The marching host
throve not in battle, but God put them to flight.  With His hands
He shielded thee against the force of greater numbers in the
battle because of the holy covenant which thou dost keep with the
Lord of heaven."

(ll. 2121-2125) And the prince laid his hand upon him and blessed
him, and Abraham gave a tenth part of all the booty unto the
bishop of God.  Then unto Abraham spake the battle-king, the
prince of Sodom, bereft of his warriors (he had need of favour):

(ll. 2126-2135) "Restore me now the maidens of my people whom
thou hast rescued with thy host from evil bondage.  Keep thou the
twisted gold that was my people's, the wealth and treasure.  But
let me lead again in freedom to their native land and wasted
dwellings the children of my people, the women and lads and
widows in their affliction.  Our sons are dead and all our
nobles, save a few only who must guard with me the marches of our
land."

(ll. 2136-2138) And straightway, crowned with valour and victory
and glory, Abraham made answer before the earls.  Right nobly
spake he:

(ll. 2139-2160) "I say to thee, O prince of men, before the Holy
Lord of earth and heaven, there is no worldly treasure I will
take, nor scot nor shilling of what I have redeemed for thee
among the bowmen, great prince and lord of men, lest that thou
afterward shouldest say that I grew rich with the riches of Sodom
and its olden treasure.  But thou mayest take hence with thee all
that booty which I won for thee in battle, save only the portion
of these lordly men, of Aner, and of Mamre, and of Eshcol.  I
will not willingly deprive these warriors of their right, for
they upheld me in the shock of battle and fought to thine
advantage.  Depart now, taking home the well-wrought gold, and
lovely maidens, the daughters of thy people.  Thou needest not to
dread the onrush of thy foes, or war of the Northmen, but the
blood-stained birds of prey are resting on the mountain slopes,
gorged with the slain of their armies."

(ll. 2161-2167) Then the king departed to his home with the booty
which the holy Hebrew prince, mindful of honour, had given him.
And the Lord of heaven appeared again unto Abraham, comforting
the noble man of heart with holy speech, and said:

(ll. 2168-2172) "Great shall be thy reward!  Let not thy heart be
shaken, doing My will.  Thou needest have no whit of dread if
thou wilt keep My precepts, but I will shield thee with My hands,
and shelter thee from every evil, so long as thy life endureth.
Be not afraid."


XXXI

(ll. 2173-2186) And Abraham, full of years and noble deeds, made
answer to his Lord and asked: "What comfort canst Thou give me,
Lord of spirits, who am thus desolate?  No need have I to heap up
treasure for any child of mine, but after me my kinsmen shall
enjoy my wealth.  Thou grantest me no son, and therefore sorrow
presseth on my heart.  I can devise no counsel.  My steward goeth
to and fro rejoicing in his children, and firmly thinketh in his
heart that after me his sons shall be my heirs.  He seeth that no
child is born to me."

(ll. 2187-2215) And straightway God made answer unto him: "Never
shall son of thy steward inherit thy goods; but thine own son
shall have thy treasure when thy flesh lieth cold.  Behold the
heavens!  Number their jewels, the shining stars, that shed their
wondrous beauty far and wide, and blaze so brightly over the
spacious sea.  So shall thy tribe be and thy seed for number.
Let not thy heart be troubled.  Yet shall thy wife conceive and
bear a son, great in goodness, to be warden of thy wealth, when
thou art gone.  Be not cast down.  I am the Lord who, many a year
ago, brought thee forth from out the land of the Chaldeans, with
but a few, and gave thee this wide realm to rule.  I give thee
now My promise, prince of Hebrews, thy seed shall settle many a
spacious kingdom, the regions of the world from the Egyptian
borders even unto Euphrates, and where the Nile hems in a mighty
land and the sea limits it.  All this shall thy sons inhabit;
each tract and tribal realm and lofty stone-built city,
whatsoever those three waters and their foaming floods encircle
with their streams."

(ll. 2216-2219) Now Sarah's heart was heavy that she bare no
goodly son to gladden Abraham; with bitter grief she spake unto
her husband:

(ll. 2220-2233) "The Lord of heaven hath denied me to increase
thy tribe, or bear thee children under heaven.  I have no hope
that we shall have a son to stay our house.  My heart is sad.  My
lord, do now according as I bid thee.  Here is a virgin subject
unto thee, a comely maid, a daughter of the Egyptian people.  Bid
her go quickly to thy bed and thou shalt prove if by this woman
the Lord will send an heir unto thy house."

(ll. 2234-2246) And the blessed man gave ear unto the woman's
counsels, and bade his handmaid go unto his bed, according as his
wife had counselled him.  And the maiden conceived by Abraham,
and her heart grew arrogant.  She stubbornly began to vex her
mistress, was insolent, insulting, evil-hearted, and would not
willingly be subject to her, but straightway entered into strife
with Sarah.  Then, as I have heard, the woman told her sorrow to
her lord, speaking with bitter grief:

(ll. 2247-2255) "Thou hast not done me right or justice!  Since
first my handmaid, Hagar, knew thy bed, according as I counselled
thee, thou sufferest her to vex me day by day in word and deed.
But her atonement shall be bitter if I may still rule over my own
maid, dear Abraham.  And may Almighty God, the Lord of lords, be
judge between us."

(ll. 2256-2260) And straightway Abraham, wise of heart, made
answer: "Never will I let thee be dishonoured while we two live.
But thou shalt deal with thine handmaid even according as it
pleaseth thee."


XXXII

(ll. 2261-2270) Then was the wife of Abraham hard of heart and
hostile-minded, ruthless, and merciless against her handmaid, and
bitterly declared her hate.  And the maiden fled from thraldom
and oppression, and would not brook punishment or retribution for
what she wrought against Sarah.  But she fled into the wilderness.
And there a thane of glory, an angel of the Lord, found her sad of
heart and questioned her:

(ll. 2271-2272) "Whither art thou hastening, unhappy girl,
handmaid of Sarah?"

(ll. 2273-2279) And straightway she answered him: "Devoid of all
good things, in misery, I fled away out of my dwelling, from the
hate of my lady, from injury and wrong.  Here in the wilderness
with tear-stained face I shall abide my doom, when from my heart
grim hunger or the wolf shall tear my soul and sorrow."

(ll. 2280-2295) And the angel answered her: "Seek not to flee
away and leave thy lord, but return again, deserve honour, be of
humble heart, constant in virtue, and faithful to thy lord.
Thou, Hagar, shalt bring forth a son to Abraham.  And I say unto
thee that men shall call him Ishmael.  He shall be terrible, and
swift to war; his hand shall be against the tribes of men, his
kinsmen.  Many shall war upon him bitterly.  And from that prince
shall spring a race and an unnumbered tribe.  Return again to
seek thy lord, and dwell with them that have thee in possession."

(ll. 2296-2305) And she hearkened unto the angel's counsel, and
returned again unto her lord, according as the holy messenger of
God commanded in words of wisdom.  And Abraham had lived for
six-and-eighty winters in the world when Ishmael was born.  And
the boy grew strong and throve according as the angel, the
faithful minister of peace, had told the maid.  And after
thirteen years the Lord, Eternal God, said unto Abraham:

(ll. 2306-2325) "Dearest of men, keep well our covenant as I
shall show thee, and I will prosper thee and honour thee in every
season.  Be swift to work My will.  I will be mindful of the
covenant and pledge I gave thee to thy comfort, because thy soul
was sad.  Thou shalt sanctify thy household, and set a victor-sign
on every male, if thou wilt have in Me a lord or faithful friend
unto thy people.  I will be lord and shepherd of this folk if ye
will serve Me in your hearts, and keep My laws. And each male child
that cometh into the world, among this people, shall be devoted
unto Me in seven nights' time, by the victor-token, or else cut off
from all the world with persecution, and exiled from all good.

(ll. 2325-2337) "Do as I bid thee: I will be gracious unto you if
ye will use that token of true faith.  Thy wife shall bear a son,
and men shall call him Isaac.  Thou shalt not need to shame thee
for him, but I will grant him grace divine, by My great might,
and many a friend.  He shall receive My blessing and My bliss, My
love and favour.  From him shall spring a mighty people and many
a valiant leader, rulers of kingdoms, lords of the world,
renowned afar."


XXXIII

(ll. 2338-2347) Then Abraham laid his face upon the ground and
pondered these sayings in his heart with scorn.  For he deemed
that never the day would come when Sarah, his greyhaired wife,
would bear a son.  Full well he knew that she had lived an
hundred winters in the world.  And full of years he spake unto
the Lord:

(ll. 2348-2352) "May Ishmael live according to Thy laws, O Lord,
and render Thee a thankful and a steadfast spirit, an earnest
heart to do Thy will, by night and day, in word and deed."

(ll. 2353-2354) And graciously Eternal God, Almighty Lord, made
answer:

(ll. 2355-2369) "Yet shall Sarah bear a son, though old in
winters, and fate shall be fulfilled according to My word.  I
will bless Ishmael, thy firstborn, with My blessing as thou dost
ask, that his days may be long in the land, and his race may
multiply.  This will I grant thee.  So also will I prosper Isaac,
thy younger son, who is not yet born, with every good and
pleasant thing all the days of his life.  And I will surely keep
My covenant with him and holy faith, and show him favour."

(ll. 2370-2381) And Abraham did even as Eternal God commanded,
and, in accordance with his Lord's behest, he set the sign of the
covenant upon his son, and bade his bondmen also bear that holy
token.  He was wise of heart, and mindful of the covenant and
pledge which God had given him, and he himself received the
glorious sign.  God, the Mighty King, increased his glory in the
world.  And he strove in all his ways to work the will of his
Lord....

((LACUNA--One leaf missing))

(ll. 2382-2389) But the woman laughed at the Lord of hosts with
derision; full of years, she pondered those sayings in her heart
with scorn.  She had no faith that His words would be fulfilled.
And when the Lord of heaven heard that in her bower the wife of
Abraham laughed in unbelief, then spake the Holy God:

(ll. 2390-2398) "Lo!  Sarah trusteth not My word.  Yet all shall
be fulfilled according as I promised thee in the beginning.  I
tell thee truly, at this self-same season thy wife shall bear a
son.  And when I come again unto this dwelling My word shall be
fulfilled, and thine eyes shall behold thy son, dear Abraham."


XXXIV

(ll. 2399-2407) And alter these words they departed swiftly away
from the place of oracle.  The holy spirits turned their steps
(and the Prince of light was their companion) till they beheld
high Sodom's city-walls.  They saw high halls towering above
precious treasure and mansions above ruddy gold.  And the
Righteous Lord of heaven held long discourse with Abraham:

(ll. 2408-2418) "I hear loud tumult in this city and brawling of
sinful men, the boastful words of tipplers drunk with ale, and
evil speech of multitudes within their walls.  Heavy are the sins
of this people and the offences of these faithless men.  But I
will search out what this people do, O Hebrew prince, and whether
they sin so greatly in their thoughts and deeds as their evil
tongues speak fraud and guile.  Verily brimstone and black flame,
bitter and grim and fiercely burning, shall visit vengeance on
these heathen folk...."

((LACUNA--One leaf missing.))


XXXV

(ll. 2419-2437) And so these men abode their punishment and woe
within their walls, and their wives with them.  Proud in their
strength, they repaid God evil for good until the Lord of
spirits, Prince of life and light, could no longer withhold His
wrath.  Stern of heart, God sent two mighty messengers among them
who came at even-tide unto the city of Sodom.  They came upon a
man sitting in the gate of the city, even the son of Haran, and
they appeared as young men before the eyes of the sage.  Then the
servant of the Lord arose and went unto the strangers, and
greeted them with kindness; he was mindful of what is right and
fitting among men, and offered them a shelter for the night.  And
the noble messengers of God made answer:

(ll. 2438-2440) "We thank thee for the favour thou hast showed
us.  Yet do we think to bide here quietly beside this street
until the time of the dawn, when God shall send again the sun."

(ll. 2441-2453) Then Lot fell at their feet, and knelt upon the
ground before his guests, and offered them food and rest, the
shelter of his house, and entertainment.  And they accepted the
kindness of the prince with thanks, and went in quickly with him
unto his dwelling as the Hebrew earl pointed them the way.  And
the lordly hero, wise of heart, gave them fair entertainment in
his hall, until the evening light vanished away.  Then night
came, hard upon the heels of day, and clothed the ocean-streams
with darkness, and all the glory of the world, seas and
wide-stretching land.

(ll. 2453-2466) Then in great throngs the dwellers of Sodom,
young and old, undear to God, came to demand the strangers, in
multitudes encompassed Lot about, and his guests.  They bade him
lead the holy heralds out from the lofty hall into their power.
Shamelessly they said that they would know these men.  Of decency
they had no heed.  Then swiftly Lot arose, deviser of counsel,
and went forth from his dwelling; the son of Haran, mindful of
wisdom, spake unto all that gathering of men:

(ll. 2467-2476) "Within my house two stainless daughters dwell.
(Neither of them yet has known a man.)  Do now as I bid you and
forsake this sin.  Them will I give you rather than that ye work
this shame against your nature, and grievous evil against the
sons of men.  Take now the maidens and leave my guests in peace,
for I will defend them against you before God, if so I may."

(ll. 2477-2484) And all that multitude of godless men with one
accord made answer unto him: "This seemeth meet and very right:
that thou leave this land!  An exile, from afar thou camest to
this country, desolate of friends, and lacking food.  And now
wilt thou be judge over us, if so may be, and teach our people?"

(ll. 2485-2499) Then, as I have heard, the heathen leaders laid
hand on Lot and seized him.  But his guests, the righteous
strangers, brought him aid, and drew him within his dwelling from
out the clutches of these cruel men.  And straightway the eyes of
all those standing round about were darkened; and suddenly the
host of city-dwellers became blind.  They might not storm the
halls, with savage hearts against the strangers, as they strove
to do, but stoutly the ministers of God withstood them.  Lot's
guests had sturdy strength, and smote the host with vengeance.
Fairly the faithful ministers of peace spake unto Lot:

(ll. 2500-2512) "If thou have any son, or kinsman dear among this
people, or any friend of these maidens whom we here behold, lead
forth in haste from the city those dear to thee, and save thy
life, lest thou too perish with these faithless men.  Because of
the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah the Lord hath bidden give them
over to fire and black flame, to smite the people in their
dwellings with the pangs of death, and work His vengeance.  The
hour is nigh at hand.  Flee upon the paths of earth, and save thy
life.  To thee the Lord is gracious...."

((LACUNA--One leaf missing.))


XXXVI

(ll. 2513-2526) And straightway Lot made answer unto them: "I may
not wander so far hence, afoot, in search of safety, with these
women.  But ye may fairly show me love and friendship, and grant
me grace and favour.  I know a little high-built town not far
from here; there grant me rest and respite, in Zoar to find
safety.  If ye will shield that lofty stronghold from the flame,
we may abide there for a time secure, and save our lives."

(ll. 2526-2534) And friendly was the righteous angels' answer:
"Thou shalt receive this boon, since thou hast spoken of the
city.  Go quickly to that stronghold, and we will grant thee
peace and our protection.  We will not wreak God's vengeance on
these faithless men, nor slay this sinful race, till thou hast
brought thy children unto Zoar, and thy wife with them."

(ll. 2535-2547) Then Abraham's kinsman hastened to the
stronghold.  He swiftly journeyed with his women, and stayed not
foot until he led his children into Zoar, under the city-gates,
and his wife with them.  And when the sun arose, peace-candle of
men, then, as I have heard, the Lord of glory sent brimstone out
of heaven, black fire and raging flame, in vengeance upon men,
because so long in days gone by they had displeased the Lord.
The Ruler of spirits gave them their reward!

(ll. 2547-2561) And a great fear gripped the heathen race; din
arose in their cities, wailing of sinful men, a wretched people
at the point of death.  All that was green in the golden cities
the flame devoured; likewise no little portion of the wide land
round about was covered with flame and terror.  Fair groves and
fruits of the earth were turned to ash and glowing ember, even as
far as that grim vengeance swept the broad land of men.  A
roaring flame, destroying all things high and spacious, consumed
the wealth of Sodom and Gomorrah.  All this the Lord God
destroyed, and the people with it.

(ll. 2561-2575) But when Lot's wife heard the rushing flame, and
dying men within the city, she looked behind her to that place of
death.  Straightway, the writings tell us, she was changed into
the likeness of a pillar of salt; and ever since, the image
(far-famed is the story) has stood in silence where that bitter
vengeance came upon her, because she would not heed the bidding
of the thanes of glory.  Hard and high-towering in that spot of
earth she must abide her fate, the doom of God, till time shall
cease and the world vanish away.  That is a wonder which the Lord
of glory wrought!


XXXVII

(ll. 2576-2599) And Abraham, the man of wisdom, went out alone at
dawn and came again unto the place where he had spoken with his
Lord.  Far and wide he saw the fatal smoke curling upward from
the earth.  Pride had come upon that people and drunkenness, and
they became too insolent in evil and bold in sin.  God's
judgements they forgot, and truth, and Him who gave them wealth
and blessing in their cities.  Wherefore the Prince of angels
sent a consuming flame in punishment upon them.  But our Faithful
Lord was gracious, and remembered Abraham, His beloved, as oft He
did, and delivered Lot, his kinsman, when the multitude were
slain.  Now Lot, the valiant, durst no longer dwell in that
stronghold for fear of God, but he departed out of the city, and
his children with him, to seek a dwelling far from the place of
slaughter, and found, at last, a cave upon the slope of a high
hill.  And Lot, the blessed, dear unto God and faithful, abode
there many a day, and his two daughters with him....

((LACUNA--One leaf missing.))

(ll. 2600-2620) Thus did they, and the elder daughter went in
first unto their father's bed, as he lay drunk with wine.  And
the old man knew not when the maidens came unto his bed, but his
mind and wit were clouded within him, and, drunk with wine, he
knew not the coming of the maids.  And the lovely sisters
conceived, and bare sons unto their aged father.  Lot's older
daughter called her son's name Moab.  And the younger called her
son's name Ammon, as the sacred writings say.  Of these princes
sprang a countless folk, two famous peoples.  One tribe men call
the Moabites, a far-famed race; the other tribe men call the
Ammonites.


XXXVIII

(ll. 2621-2627) Then the brother of Haran departed with his wife
and household and with all his substance to be subject unto
Abimelech.  And Abraham said unto men, of Sarah, his wife, "She
is my sister," and thereby saved his life.  For well he knew he
had few friends or kinsfolk among that people.  And the prince
sent forth his thanes and bade them bring him Abraham's wife.

(ll. 2628-2637) Then a second time, while dwelling among alien
people, Abraham's wife was taken from her husband, and given into
a stranger's arms.  But the Eternal Lord sustained them as He oft
had done.  Our Saviour came at night unto the king as he lay
drunk with wine.  The King of truth spake unto the prince in a
dream, and in anger denounced him:

(ll. 2638-2641) "The wife of Abraham hast thou taken from him,
and for this deed of evil death shall smite thy soul within thy
breast."

(ll. 2641-2652) And, heavy with feasting, the lord of sin began
to speak in his slumber: "O Prince of angels, wilt Thou ever, in
Thine anger, suffer a life to fail which liveth with righteous
ways and upright heart, and seeketh mercy at Thy hands?  I
questioned not the woman, but she said that she was Abraham's
sister.  And I have wrought no evil against her, nor any sin."

(ll. 2653-2666) Then again a second time the Righteous Lord,
Eternal God, spake unto him in his dream, and said: "O prince of
men, if thou reck aught of longer living in the world, restore
this woman unto Abraham to be his wife.  He is wise and
righteous, and may behold the King of glory and speak with Him.
But thou shalt perish with thy goods and treasure, if thou
withhold this woman from the prince.  But if that just and
patient man will intercede for thee, he may prevail with Me to
let thee live unharmed, enjoying blessings, friends, and treasure
all the days of thy life."

(ll. 2666-2674) Then in fear the warden of the people awoke from
his slumber, and bade summon his counsellors.  Smitten with
tenor, Abimelech told them the words of God.  And they feared
God's vengeance on that deed, according to the dream.  Then the
king in haste called Abraham before him.  The mighty prince said
unto him:

(ll. 2675-2690) "Tell me now what evil I have done thee, Hebrew
prince, since first thou camest to our land with thy possessions,
that now so fiercely thou shouldest lay a snare before me.  Lo,
Abraham!  a stranger to this people, thou wouldest entrap us, and
defile with sin.  Thou saidest Sarah was thy sister and thy kin!
Through her thou wouldest have done me grievous hurt and endless
evil.  We harboured thee with honour, in friendly wise allotting
thee a dwelling in this realm, and lands for thine enjoyment.
But in no friendly way dost thou reward or thank us for our
favours."


XXXIX

(ll. 2691-2716) And Abraham answered: "I did it not in guile or
hatred, nor yet to work thee any woe.  But I was far from mine
own people, prince of men, and shielded me by craft from,
violence and death.  Since Holy God first led me forth of old
from the home of my lord and father, desolate of friends, I have
visited many a people, many an alien race, and this woman with
me.  And ever this fear was in my heart, seeing I was a stranger,
lest some foe should slay me, and take this woman to himself.
Wherefore I said that Sarah was my sister, and this I told the
war-smiths everywhere on earth where we two homeless needs must
dwell with strangers.  And so I did in this land also, mighty
prince, when I came under thy protection.  I knew not if the fear
of God Almighty was among this people, when first I came here.
Therefore, with care, I hid from thee and from thy thanes the
truth, that Sarah was my wife and shared my bed."

(ll. 2717-2722) Then Abimelech began to endow Abraham with
treasure, and gave him his wife again; and because he had taken
his wife he gave him, to boot, wandering herds and servants and
gleaming silver.  And the lord of men said also unto Abraham:

(ll. 2723-2726) "Abide with us and choose thee a dwelling in this
land, and an abode whereso it pleaseth thee; thee must I keep.
Be thou a faithful friend, and we will give thee riches."

(ll. 2727-2735) And the dispenser of treasure spake also unto
Sarah, and said: "No need hath Abraham, thy lord, to reproach
thee, O maiden of elfin beauty, because thou hast trod my halls.
With gleaming silver will I make requital for this wrong.  Care
not to go forth from this folk-land, seeking elsewhere unknown
friends, but dwell ye here."

(ll. 2736-2741) And Abraham did according to the bidding of the
prince, accepting the friendship offered by his lord, with love
and favour.  Dear was he unto God; knowing great blessedness and
peace, and walking in his Lord's protection and under the shelter
of His wings, so long as his life endured.

(ll. 2742-2759) Yet was God still angered against Abimelech for
the wrong he had wrought against Sarah and against Abraham, in
severing the bonds of these beloved, man and wife.  He suffered
woe and bitter punishment; the maidens, slave nor free, might not
bear children to their lords, but God denied them, till holy
Abraham prayed his Lord, Eternal God, for mercy.  And the Lord of
angels granted him his prayer, and for the king restored
fertility to man and maid, to slave and free.  The Lord of heaven
suffered again their number to increase, their riches and
possessions; and the Almighty Warden of mankind was merciful of
heart unto Abimelech, as Abraham besought Him.

(ll. 2760-2771) Then the Almighty Lord came unto Sarah, according
to His word; our God, the Lord of life, fulfilled His promise to
His dear ones, the man and woman.  His wife brought forth a son
to Abraham, and, ere his mother had conceived him, the Prince of
angels called him Isaac.  And Abraham with his own hand set the
glorious sign upon him within the week his mother bare him.


XL

(ll. 2772-2777) And the boy grew strong and throve and his nature
was noble.  Now Abraham had lived an hundred winters in the world
when his wife, with thankful heart, brought forth a son.  And he
had waited long for that event since first the Lord, by His own
word, announced the day of joy.

(ll. 2778-2783) And it came to pass upon a time that the woman
saw Ishmael playing before Abraham as they sat with holy hearts
at meat together, and all their household drank and revelled.
Then said his wife, the noble woman, to her lord:

(ll. 2783-2791) "Beloved lord, and warden of treasure, grant me a
boon!  Bid Hagar go forth from among us, and Ishmael with her.
No longer shall we dwell together, if I may rule and have my
will.  Never shall Ishmael, after thee, divide the heritage with
Isaac, my son, when thou hast given up the ghost from out thy
body."

(ll. 2791-2796) Then it grieved Abraham in his heart that he must
drive his own son into exile; but God, the Just and Righteous,
succoured him.  He knew that the heart of the man was heavy with
sorrow.  The King of angels, the Eternal Lord, said unto Abraham:

(ll. 2797-2803) "Let care and sorrow vanish from thy heart, and
hearken unto the woman, thy wife.  Bid Hagar go forth from this
land, and Ishmael, the lad, with her.  And I will multiply his
race, and stablish them with ample blessings, as I have promised
by My word."

(ll. 2804-2806) And the man hearkened unto his Lord, and drove
them forth in sadness from his dwelling, the woman and his
son....

((LACUNA--One leaf missing.))

(ll. 2807-2831) "Clear is it that the Just God, Lord of heaven,
is with thee, granting thee triumph by His might and wisdom, and
strengthening thy heart with grace divine.  Therefore ye throve
in all your dealings, with friend or foe, in word or deed.  With
His hands the Lord God prospered thee in all thy ways.  That is
full widely known unto the city-dwellers!  Graciously grant me
now, I pray thee, Hebrew prince, thy promise and thy pledge, that
thou wilt be a faithful friend to me, according to the kindness I
have done thee since, wretched and in exile, thou camest from
afar unto this land.  Requite it now with kindness that I grudged
thee not of land or favour.  Be gracious to this nation, my
people, if the Lord our God, who ruleth the fates of men, will
grant thee to extend the borders of this people, dealing out
wealth to warriors of the shield, and treasure to the brave."

(ll. 2832-2833) And Abraham gave a pledge unto Abimelech that he
would do according to his prayer.


XLI

(ll. 2834-2845) And the Hebrew prince, the blessed son of Terah,
abode a long time in the land of the Philistines, wretched and in
exile.  And the Lord of angels assigned him a dwelling-place, and
the city-dwelling sons of men call that land Beersheba.  There
the holy man built a lofty city wherein to dwell, and planted a
grove and raised an altar, and on the altar made ample offerings
and sacrifice to God, who granted him life and blessing under
heaven.

(ll. 2846-2849) Then the Mighty Lord made a trial of the prince,
and proved his strength, and sternly spake unto him, saying:

(ll. 2850-2859) "Abraham!  Betake thee quickly on a journey, and
with thee lead thine only son.  Thou shalt offer thy son Isaac
unto Me in sacrifice.  When thou hast mounted the steep downs and
the slope of the high land which I will show thee, there shalt
thou build an altar, and kindle a flame, slay thy son with the
sword, and burn his body with black flame, and offer it a
sacrifice to Me."

(ll. 2860-2877) He delayed not the journey, but swiftly made him
ready.  For the word of the Lord of angels was terrible to him,
and his Lord was dear.  The blessed Abraham rested not nor slept
nor spurned his Lord's behest, but the holy man girded him with a
grey sword, and showed that fear of the Lord of spirits abode in
his heart.  The aged dispenser of gold began to saddle his asses,
and bade two young men journey with him; his son was the third,
and he the fourth.  And he went out from his house with Isaac,
the lad, according as God commanded.  He went with speed and
hastened on the paths of earth, according as the Lord marked out
the way across the waste, until, in gleaming glory, the dawn of
the third day arose over the deep water.

(ll. 2877-2880) Then the blessed man beheld the high hills
towering up, as the Lord of heaven had told him.  And Abraham
said unto his servants:

(ll. 2881-2884) "Abide ye here in this place, and we two will
come again, when we have worshipped God."

(ll. 2885-2889) And the prince and his son departed across the
weald to the place which the Lord had showed him; the lad carried
wood, and the father bare fire and sword.  And the lad, young in
winters, spake unto Abraham and said:

(ll. 2890-2892) "Here have we fire and sword, my lord!  But where
is the fair burnt-offering thou thinkest to sacrifice to God?"

(ll. 2893-2896) And Abraham answered (firm was his resolve to do
as God had bidden): "That will the Righteous Lord, the Warden of
mankind, provide as seemeth right to Him."

(ll. 2897-2908) Stout of heart he mounted the high downs, and his
son with him, according as Eternal God commanded, until he stood
upon the ridge of the high land in the place which the Firm and
Faithful Lord had showed him.  And there he built a pyre and
kindled a flame and bound his son, hand and foot, and laid Isaac,
the lad, on the altar, and seized his sword by the hilt.  With
his own hand he would have slain him, and quenched the flame with
the blood of his son.

(ll. 2908-2913) Then a thane of God, an angel from on high,
called unto Abraham with a loud voice.  In stillness he abode the
herald's message and answered the angel.  Swiftly the glorious
minister of God addressed him from the heavens:

(ll. 2914-2922) "Slay not thy son, dear Abraham, but take the lad
from the altar alive.  The God of glory is gracious unto him!
Great shall thy reward be, Hebrew prince, true meed of victory
and ample gifts, at the holy hands of the Heavenly King.  The
Lord of spirits will bless thee with His blessing because His
love and favour were dearer unto thee than thine own son."

(ll. 2923-2936) The altar-fire stood kindled.  The Lord of men
had gladdened the heart of Abraham, kinsman of Lot, when He
restored to him his son, alive.  And the blessed man, brother of
Haran, looked over his shoulder and beheld a ram standing not far
off, caught fast in the brambles.  And Abraham took it, and laid
it upon the altar in the stead of his son, and drawing his sword
made ready an offering and an altar smoking with the blood of the
ram, and sacrificed that offering to God, and gave Him thanks for
all the loving kindness which the Lord had showed him, early and
late.



EXODUS


XLII

(ll. 1-7) Lo! far and wide throughout the earth we have heard
how the laws of Moses, a wondrous code, proclaim to men reward of
heavenly life for all the blessed after death, and lasting gain
for every living soul.  Let him hear who will!

(ll. 8-22) On him the Lord of hosts, the Righteous King, showed
honour in the wilderness, and the Eternal Ruler gave him might to
work great wonders.  He was beloved of God, a lord of men, a wise
and ready leader of the host, a bold folk-captain.  Affliction
came upon the tribe of Pharaoh, the enemy of God, when the Lord
of victories entrusted to the bold folk-leader his kinsmen's
lives, and gave the sons of Abraham a dwelling and an habitation.
Great was his reward!  The Lord was gracious unto him and gave
him weapon-might against the terror of his foes, wherewith he
overcame in battle many a warrior, and the strength of hostile
men.

(ll. 22-34) And first the Lord of hosts spake unto him and told
him many wonders, how the Triumphant Lord in wisdom wrought the
world, and the compass of the earth, and the arching heavens; and
told His own name, which the sons of men, wise patriarchs of old,
knew not before, though they knew many things.  And the Lord
honoured the leader of the host, the foe of Pharaoh, and
strengthened him with righteous strength on his departure, when,
of old, in punishment that mighty host was drenched with death.

(ll. 35-53) Wailing arose at the fall of their princes; their
hall-joys were hushed and their treasure was scattered.  Fiercely
at midnight He smote the oppressors, slaying their firstborn,
laying their watchmen low.  Wide the destroyer's path, and the
way of the fell folk-slayer!  The whole land mourned the dead.
The host departed.  Loud was the voice of their wailing, little
their joy!  Locked were the hands of the laughter-makers; the
multitude had leave to go its way, a wandering folk.  The Fiend
was robbed and all the hosts of hell.  Heaven's might came upon
them; their idols fell.  That was a glorious day through all the
world when the host went forth!  Many a year the vile Egyptians
suffered bondage, because they thought for ever to refuse to
Moses' kinsmen, if God would let them, their longing for the
journey of their heart's desire.

(ll. 54-62) The host was ready.  The prince who led them was
stalwart and bold.  He passed by many a stronghold with his
people, leaders and lands of many hostile men, by narrow, lonely
paths and unknown ways, until at last they marched, in armour,
against the Ethiopian realm.  Their lands were covered with a
cloud, their border-homes upon the mountain-slopes.  Past these,
with many a hindrance, Moses led his people.


XLIII

(ll. 63-67) And two nights after they escaped their foes God bade
the noble prince to make encampment about the town of Etham in
the marchlands, with all his force, a mighty army, and tumult of
the host.

(ll. 68-88) With anxious hearts they hastened on their northward
way; they knew that southward lay the Ethiop's land, parched
hill-slopes and a race burned brown by the heat of the sun.  But
Holy God shielded that folk against the fiery heat, stretching a
covering over the flaming heavens, and over the burning air a
holy veil.  A cloud widestretching severed earth from heaven, and
led the host; burning and heavenly bright the fiery flame was
quenched.  The warriors marvelled, most joyous of hosts.  The
shelter of the day-shield moved across the heavens; God in His
wisdom had covered the course of the sun with a sail, though
earth-dwelling men knew not the mast-ropes, nor might behold the
yards, nor understand the way in which that greatest of tents was
fastened.  So He showed honour and glory upon the faithful!

(ll. 88-97) Then was a third encampment to the comfort of the
folk.  The army all beheld the holy sail, the gleaming marvel of
the sky, towering above them.  And all that folk, the men of
Israel, perceived that there the Lord of hosts was present to
measure out a camp.  Before them moved two columns in the
heavens, fire and cloud, sharing alike the service of the Holy
Spirit, the journey of brave-hearted men, by day and night.

(ll. 98-106) And in the dawn, as I have heard, the valiant-hearted
blared forth their trumpetcalls, in peals of thunder.  And all the
host, the band of the brave, arose and made them ready, according
as Moses, their glorious leader, gave bidding to God's people.
They beheld their guide go forth before them measuring out the path
of life.  The sail governed their journey, and after it, with joyful
hearts, the seamen trod their path through the great waters.  Loud
was the tumult of the host.


LXIV

(ll. 106-134) Each evening rose a heavenly beacon, a second
wondrous marvel after the setting of the sun, a pillar of flame
shining in splendour over the hosts of men.  Bright were its
shining beams above the warriors; their bucklers gleamed, the
shadows vanished away.  No secret place could hide the deep
night-shadows.  Heaven's candle burned.  Needs must this new
night warden watch above the host, lest in the stormy weather
grey heath and desert-terror should overcome their souls with
sudden fear.  Streaming locks of fire had their guide, and
shining beams, menacing the host with flame and terror, and
threatening destruction to that people in the waste, except they
swiftly hearkened unto Moses.  Armour gleamed, and bucklers
glistened as the warriors took their steadfast way.  And over the
troops and high above the host stood the banner, moving as they
moved, even unto the stronghold of the sea at the land's end.
And there they pitched a camp and rested, for they were weary.
Stewards brought the warriors food and strengthened them.  And
when the trumpet sang they stretched themselves upon the hills,
shipmen within their tents.  That was the fourth encampment and
pause of the shield-men by the Red Sea.

(ll. 135-141) There dread tidings of inland pursuit came unto the
army.  A great fear fell upon them, and dread of the host.  So
the exiles abode the coming of the fierce pursuers, who long had
crushed those homeless men and wrought them injury and woe.  They
heeded not the covenant which the ancient king had given
aforetime....

((LACUNA--Two leaves missing.))


XLV

(ll. 142-153) ....who became the people's heir and had their
treasure, and greatly throve.  All this the Egyptian race forgot
when their wrath was stirred by a quarrel.  They wrought great
wrong to Moses' kinsmen, broke the covenant, and slew them.
Their hearts were filled with faithlessness and rage, the mighty
passions of men.  They would fain requite the gift of life with
evil, that the people of Moses might pay for that day's work in
blood, if almighty God would prosper their destructive journey.

(ll. 154-169) Then the hearts of the earls were hopeless within
them as they beheld the shining bands, the hosts of Pharaoh,
marching from out the south, uplifting a forest of lances, with
banners waving above them, a great host treading the border-paths.
Their spears were in array, shields gleamed and trumpets sang; the
battle line rolled on.  Over dead bodies circling screamed the birds
of battle, dewy-leathered, greedy for war, dark carrion lovers.  In
hope of food, the wolves, remorseless beasts of slaughter, sang a
grim eveningsong; dogging the march of the foe, they abode the
coming of death; the march warders howled in the midnight.  The
doomed soul fled; the host was compassed about.

(ll. 170-199) Now and again the proud thanes of the host measured
the mile-paths on their steeds.  The prince of men rode forth
before the troops, the war-king raised the standard; the
battle-warden bound on helm and chinguard (banners gleamed) in
expectation of war, shook his armour, and bade his warlike host,
his firm-ranked cohorts, go boldly into battle.  The foe beheld
with hostile eyes the coming of the landsmen.  About him fearless
fighters moved; grey wolves of war went forward to the onslaught
thirsting for battle, loyal of heart.  He chose the flower of his
people for that service, two thousand far-famed heroes of high
birth, kings and kinsmen.  And each led out his men, and all the
warriors that he well could muster in the appointed time.  The
young men were gathered together, the kings in their pomp.
Frequently sounding, the well-known voice of the horn signalled
the host where the war-troop of heroes should bear their arms.
So the dark horde was marshalled; throng after throng, in
thousands, hasted thither, a countless host.  They were resolved,
in vengeance for their brothers, to slay the tribes of Israel
with the sword, at the break of day.

(ll. 200-208) Then a sound of wailing arose in the camp, an
evening-song of woe.  A great fear was upon them; the nets of
death encompassed them about.  The fatal tidings flew abroad;
tumult arose.  The foe were resolute, a horde in armour gleaming,
until the mighty angel who upheld that host scattered the proud
and hateful multitude, so that no more might one behold another's
face; but their journey was divided.

(ll. 209-220) All that long night the fugitives had respite,
though foes beset them upon either hand, on the one side that
great host, on the other side the sea.  They had no way of escape
nor any hope of their inheritance, but halted on the hills in
shining armour with foreboding of ill.  And all the band of
kinsmen watched and waited for the coming of the greater host
until the dawn, when Moses bade the earls with brazen trumpets
muster the folk, bade warriors rise and don their coats of mail,
bear shining arms, take thought on valour, and summon the
multitude with signal-beacons unto the sandy shore of the sea.

(ll. 220-232) The leaders bold obeyed the battle-signal; the host
made ready.  The seamen heard the trumpet-summons, and struck
their tents upon the hills.  The army was astir.  They numbered
off twelve companies of valiant men to form the van of battle
against their foes' grim wrath.  The host was in an uproar.  From
every noble tribe among that people were chosen fifty cohorts,
under shield, the flower of the folk.  And every cohort of that
famous army was of a thousand warriors, far-famed wielders of the
spear.

(ll. 232-251) That was a warlike band.  The leaders of the army
welcomed not among that number the weak, who yet because of youth
could not defend them under board and byrnie against a wily foe,
who never yet had known the baleful thrust, the bitter wound, the
insolent play of the spear over the edge of the linden shield.
Nor might the aged, grey-haired warriors be of service in the
battle if their strength had failed them.  But according to their
strength they joined the fray, even according as their valour
would endure with honour among men, and their strength suffice to
undergo the spearstrife.  The army of these sturdy men was
mustered, and ready to advance.  Their banner rose on high, a
gleaming column, and all abode there nigh unto the sea until
their guiding beacon pierced the clouds, and shone upon their
linden shields.


XLVI

(ll. 252-258) Then a herald rose before the warriors, a valiant
leader, and, lifting up his shield, he bade the captains of the
host make silence, that all the multitude might hear the words of
their brave lord.  The shepherd of the kingdom fain would speak
with holy voice unto his legions.  The leader of the host in
words of worth addressed them:

(ll. 259-275) "Be not afraid though Pharaoh leadeth hither this
mighty host of sword-men, a multitude of earls.  Upon them all
this day Almighty God will give requital by my hand, that they
may live no longer to vex the tribes of Israel with woe.  Ye
shall not dread doomed armies and dead men.  Their fleeting life
hath run unto the end.  The knowledge of God hath vanished from
your hearts.  I give you better counsel, to serve the God of
glory, and pray the Lord of life for victory and grace and
safety, wherever ye may journey.  He is the Eternal God of
Abraham, Creation's Lord, magnanimous and mighty, who with His
strong hand guardeth all this host."

(ll. 276-298) Then the lord of men spake with a loud voice before
the multitude and said: "Look now, dearest of people, with your
eyes and behold a marvel!  In my right hand grasping this green
rod I smote the ocean depths.  The waves rise up; the waters form
a rampartwall.  The sea is thrust aside.  The ways are dry: grey
army-roads, ancient foundations (never have I heard in all the
world that men before set foot thereon), shining plains,
imprisoned deep sea-bottoms over which of old the great waves
foamed.  The south wind, breath of the ocean, hath driven them
back.  The sea is cleft asunder; the ebbing waters spewed up
sand.  Well I know Almighty God hath showed you mercy, ye
bronze-clad earls.  Most haste is best now, that ye may escape
the clutch of foes since God hath reared a rampart of the red
seastreams.  These walls are fairly builded to the roof of
heaven, a wondrous wave-road."

(ll. 299-309) And after these words the multitude arose, the host
of the valiant.  The sea lay tranquil.  Upon the sand the legions
raised their standards and shining linden shields.  And over
against the Israelites the wall of water stood firm and upright
for the space of one whole day.  Of one mind was that company of
earls.  The wall of water shielded them with sure defence.  In no
wise did they scorn their holy leader's counsels as the time for
deeds drew near, when the words of their well-loved lord were
ended, and the voice of his eloquence was still.

(ll. 310-318) The fourth tribe led the way, a throng of warriors,
marching through the sea upon the green sea-bottom.  The tribe of
Judah trod that unknown road alone, before their kinsmen, and God
Almighty gave them great reward for that day's work, granting
them glory of triumphant deeds, that they might have dominion
over kingdoms and sway their kinsmen.


XLVII

(ll. 319-330) As they descended on the oceanbottom that mighty
tribe had lifted up their standard mid the spear-host, high above
their shields their battle ensign, a golden lion, bravest of
beasts.  Not long would they endure oppression by the lord of any
people while they might live and lift their spears to battle.  In
the van were strife and stubborn hand-play, warriors valiant in
the weapon-struggle, fearless fighters, bloody wounds and clash
of helmets, onrush of a battle-host, as Judah's sons advanced.

(ll. 331-339) Behind that army proudly marched the seamen, sons
of Reuben; the vikings bore their bucklers over the salt
sea-marsh, a multitude of men, a mighty legion, advancing
unafraid.  For his sin's sake Reuben yielded his dominion and
marched behind his kinsmen.  From him his brother took his right
as first-born in the tribe, his eminence and wealth.  Yet was he
ready.

(ll. 340-253) And after them with thronging bands the sons of
Simeon marched, the third division.  Banners waved above the
marching warriors; with flashing spears the battle troop pressed
on.  Over the ocean's bosom dawn arose, God's beacon, radiant
morning.  The multitude went forth, the host advanced, one
mail-clad band behind another.  And one man only led this mighty
folk, tribe after tribe, upon their march beneath the pillar of
cloud, whereby he won renown.  And each observed the right of
nations and the rank of earls, as Moses gave them bidding.

(ll. 253-361) One father had they all, one of the patriarchs, a
well-loved leader, wise of heart and dear unto his kinsmen, who
held the landright and begat a line of valiant men, the tribe of
Israel, a holy race, God's own peculiar people.  So ancient
writers tell us in their wisdom, who best have known the lineage
of men, their kinship and descent.

(ll. 362-376) Noah, the great prince, sailed over unknown waters,
deepest of floods that ever came on earth, and his three sons
with him.  Within his heart he cherished holy faith.  Wherefore
he steered across the oceanstreams the richest treasure whereof I
ever heard.  To save the life of all the tribes of earth the wise
sea-prince had numbered out a lasting remnant, a first generation,
male and female, of every living kind that brought forth offspring,
more various than men now know.  And likewise in the bosom of their
ship they bore the seed of every growing thing that men enjoy
beneath the heavens.

(ll. 377-396) Now Abraham's father, as the wise men tell us, was
ninth from Noah in lineage and descent.  This is the Abraham the
God of angels named with a name, and gave the holy tribes into
his keeping, far and near, and made him mighty over nations.  He
lived in exile.  Thereafter, at the Holy One's behest, he took
the lad, most dear of all to him, and they two, son and father,
climbed together a high land unto the hill of Sion.  And there,
so men have heard, they found a covenant and holy pledge, and saw
God's glory.  And there, in after years, the son of David, the
great king, the wisest of all earthly princes, according to the
teaching of the prophets, built a temple unto God, a holy fane,
the holiest and highest and most famous among men, the greatest
and most splendid of all temples the sons of men have built upon
the earth.

(ll. 397-416) Abraham took Isaac, his son, and went to the place
appointed, and kindled the altar flame.  The first of murderers
was not more doomed.  As a bequest to men he would have
sacrificed his well-loved son with fire and flame, his only heir
on earth, the best of children, the lasting hope and comfort of
his life, for which he long had waited.  The farfamed man laid
hand upon the lad and drew his ancient sword (loud rang the
blade), and showed he held his son's life not more dear than to
obey the King of heaven.  Up rose the earl.  He would have slain
his son, and put the lad to death with blood-red blade, if God
had not withheld him.  The Glorious Father would not take his son
in holy sacrifice, but laid His hand upon him.  And out of heaven
a restraining Voice, a Voice of glory, spake, and said to him:

(ll. 417-445) "Abraham!  Put not the lad, thy son, to death, nor
slay him with the sword!  The Lord of all hath proven thee, and
truth is known, that thou hast kept the covenant with God, a
faithful compact.  And that shall be to thee an everlasting peace
through all the days of thy life for ever.  Doth the son of man
require a greater pledge?  Heaven and earth may not cover the
words of His glory, which are ampler and greater than the regions
of earth may include, the orb of the world, and the heavens
above, the ocean depths and the murmuring air.  The King of
angels and Wielder of fates, Lord of hosts, Dispenser of victory,
sweareth an oath by His life, that men on earth with all their
wisdom shall never know the number of thy tribe and kinsmen,
shield-bearing men, to tell it truly, except someone shall grow
so wise of heart that he alone may number all the stones on earth
and stars in heaven, sand of the sea-dunes, and salt waves of the
sea.  But thy tribe, the best of peoples, free-born of their
fathers, shall dwell in the land of Canaan between the two seas
even unto the nations of Egypt...."

((LACUNA--One or two leaves missing.))


XLVIII

((Missing in Lacuna))


XLIX

(ll. 446-457) Then all that folk was smitten with terror; fear of
the flood fell on their wretched hearts.  The great sea
threatened death.  The sloping hills were soaked with blood; the
sea spewed gore.  In the deep was uproar, the waves were filled
with weapons; a death-mist rose.  The Egyptians turned and fled
away in fear, perceiving their peril.  They were shaken with
horror and fain to reach their homes.  Their boasting was
humbled.  The dreadful rushing sea swept over them.  Nor did any
of that army come ever again to their homes, but Fate cut off
retreat and locked them in the sea.

(ll. 457-470) Where before lay open roads the ocean raged.  The
host was overwhelmed.  The seas flowed forth; an uproar rose to
heaven, a moan of mighty legions.  There rose a great cry of the
doomed, and over them the air grew dark.  Blood dyed the deep.
The walls of water were shattered; the greatest of sea-deaths
lashed the heavens.  Brave princes died in throngs.  At the sea's
end hope of return had vanished away.  War shields flashed.  The
wall of water, the mighty sea-stream, rushed over the heroes.
The multitude was fettered fast in death, deprived of escape,
cunningly bound.  The ocean-sands awaited the doom ordained when
the flowing billows, the ice-cold, wandering sea with its salt
waves, a naked messenger of ill, a hostile warrior smiting down
its foes, should come again to seek its ancient bed.

(ll. 470-491) The blue air was defiled with blood.  The roaring
ocean menaced the march of the seamen with terror of death, till
the Just God swept the warriors away by Moses' hand.  The flood
foamed, hunting them afar, bearing them off in its deadly
embrace.  The doomed men died.  The sea fell on the land; the
skies were shaken.  The watery ramparts crumbled, the great waves
broke, the towering walls of water melted away, when the Mighty
Lord of heaven with holy hand smote the warriors and that haughty
race.  They could not check the onrush of the sea, nor the fury
of the ocean-flood, but it destroyed the multitude in shrieking
terror.  The raging ocean rose on high; its waters passed over
them.  A madness of fear was upon them; deathwounds bled.  The
high walls, fashioned by the hand of God, fell in upon the
marching army.

(ll. 491-515) With ancient sword the foamy-bosomed ocean smote
down the watery wall, the unprotecting ramparts, and at the blow
of death the great host fell asleep, a sinful throng.  Fast shut
in they lost their lives, an army pale with terror of the flood,
when the brown waste of waters, the raging waves, broke over
them.  The flower of Egypt perished when the host of Pharaoh, a
mighty multitude, was drowned.  The foe of God discovered as he
sank that the Lord of the ocean-floods was mightier than he, and,
terrible in wrath, with deadly power would end the battle.  The
Egyptians won a bitter recompense for that day's work.  Never
came any survivor of all that countless host unto his home again
to tell of his journey or rehearse to the wives of heroes,
throughout the cities, the grievous tidings, the death of their
treasure-wardens; but a mighty sea-death came upon them all and
swallowed their legions, and slew their heralds, and humbled
their boasting.  For they had striven against God!

(ll. 516-531) Then on the shore of the sea Moses, the
noble-hearted, preached to the Israelites, in holy words, eternal
wisdom and enduring counsels.  They name it the day's work!  And
still men find in Scripture every law which God, in words of
truth, gave Moses on that journey.  If life's interpreter, the
radiant soul within the breast, will unlock with the keys of the
spirit this lasting good, that which is dark shall be made clear,
and counsel shall go forth.  It hath the words of wisdom in its
keeping, earnestly teaching the heart, that we may not lack the
fellowship of God, or mercy of our Lord.  He giveth us, as
learned writers say, the better and more lasting joys of heaven.

(ll. 531-547) This earthly joy is fleeting, cursed with sin,
apportioned unto exiles, a little time of wretched waiting.
Homeless we tarry at this inn with sorrow, mourning in spirit,
mindful of the house of pain beneath the earth wherein are fire
and the worm, the pit of every evil ever open.  So now
arch-sinners win old age or early death; then cometh the Day of
Judgment, the greatest of all glories in the world, a day of
wrath upon the deeds of men.  The Lord Himself, in the assembly,
shall judge the multitude.  Then shall He lead the souls of the
righteous, blessed spirits, to heaven above, wherein are light
and life and joy of bliss.  In blessedness that host shall praise
the Lord of hosts, the King of glory, for ever and for ever.

(ll. 548-552) So spake the mildest of men, in a loud voice,
mindful of counsel, and made great in strength.  In silence the
host awaited his fixed will, perceiving the wonder, the hero's
words of goodly wisdom.  And he spake unto the throng and said:

(ll. 553-563) "Mighty is this multitude and great our Leader, a
strong Support who governeth our march.  He hath given the tribes
of Canaan into our hands, their cities and treasure, and
wide-stretching realms.  If ye will keep His holy precepts, the
Lord of angels will fulfil the promise which He sware to our
forefathers, in days of old--that ye shall vanquish every foe
and hold in victory the banquet hails of heroes between the two
seas.  Great shall be your fortune!"

(ll. 564-579) And at these words the host was glad.  The trumpets
sang their song of triumph, and banners tossed to strains of
joyous music.  The folk had reached the land.  The pillar of
glory had led the host, the holy legions, under God's sheltering
hand.  They rejoiced that their lives were saved from the clutch
of the foe, though boldly had those warriors ventured under the
roof of the waves.  They beheld the walls upstanding.  All the
seas seemed bloody unto them through which they bore their
armour.  They rejoiced with a song of battle that they were safe.
The army legions lifted up their voice and praised the Lord for
that great work.  The mighty host in chorus, man and maiden, sang
psalms and battle anthems, with reverent voices chanting all
these wonders.

(ll. 580-590) Then could be seen on the shore of the sea African
maidens adorned with gold.  They raised their hands in thanks for
their deliverance; they were blithe beholding their safety; they
took heed of the spoils; their bonds were broken.  On the
sea-shore they dealt out the booty among the standards, ancient
treasure and raiment and shields.  They divided the gold and the
woven cloth, the treasure of Joseph, the riches of men.  But
their foes, the greatest of armies, lay still in that place of
death.



DANIEL


L

(ll. 1-21) In Jerusalem, as I have heard, the Hebrews prospered,
dispensing treasure and holding kingly sway, as well was meet,
when by the might of God the host and all the battle legion were
given into Moses' hand, and in a multitude they got them forth
from Egypt.  That was a valiant race so long as they might rule
their realm and sway their cities!  As long as they kept the
covenant of their fathers, great was their prosperity!  And God,
the Warden of the heavenly kingdom, the Holy Lord, the Prince of
glory, the Lord of every creature, watched over them, and gave
them strength and courage, so that in war they conquered many
nations who rose against them, until at last pride came upon them
at their wine-feasts, drunken thoughts and devilish deeds, and
they forsook the teachings of their law, and the might of God.
So should no man sunder his soul's love from God.

(ll. 22-32) Then I beheld that nation walking in ways of error,
the tribe of Israel following after sin, and doing evil.  That
was a grief to God!  The Warden of the heavenly kingdom oft sent
His holy prophets, proclaiming knowledge to the people, and
wisdom to the host.  A little time they trusted in His counsels,
till longing for the joys of earth defrauded them of lasting
wisdom, and in the end they turned them from the laws of God, and
chose the Devil's craft.

(ll. 33-56) Then the Lord became displeased and angered with that
people whom He had prospered.  To them, a wandering folk, who
once were dearest of mankind to God, dearest of all peoples and
best loved of the Lord, He had showed a highway to their lofty
city and their native land, where Salem stood, wailed round about
and girt with battlements.  Thither the wise men, the Chaldean
people, came up against the city within whose walls their wealth
was stored.  A host rose up to smite them, a great army, eager
for deeds of blood.  Nebuchadnezzar, the lord of men and prince
of Babylon, stirred up strife against them in his city.  In
enmity he searched the thoughts of his heart how he most easily
could smite the Israelites and take them captive.  From south and
north he mustered savage legions, faring westward with a band of
heathen princes against that lofty town.  The rulers of Israel
prospered as long as the Lord would let them!

(ll. 57-78) Then, as I have heard, these mortal foes, a host of
unbelievers, sacked their city.  From Solomon's temple, that
glorious building, they took red gold and jewels and silver.
They plundered the treasure under the walls of stone, all such as
those earls possessed, till they had razed and wasted every
stronghold which stood for a protection to that people.  They
carried off as spoil the treasure of princes, as much as was
found there, cattle and men; and so returned, with great
possessions, over the eastern roads, leading the tribe of Israel,
a countless host, on a long journey unto Babylon, into the power
of heathen judges.  And Nebuchadnezzar showed no pity on the
tribe of Israel, but made them subject unto him to be his slaves,
all such as had escaped the sword.  And he sent a great host of
his thanes into the west to take possession of their kingdom and
their wasted realm, after the Hebrews.

(ll. 79-87) He bade his prefects seek among the wretched remnant
of the tribe of Israel which of the young men they had brought
there were wisest in the books of the law.  He wished the youths
to grow in knowledge, that they might teach him wisdom, but not
at all because he could or would be mindful to thank God for all
the gifts which He had given him to his comfort.

(ll. 88-103) And they found three wise and noble youths, devout
and young, and with the fear of God.  One was Hananiah; the
second, Azariah; the third was Mishael, chosen of the Lord.
Stout of heart and thoughtful-minded the young men came before
the king, where the heathen ruler sat rejoicing in his splendour
in the city of the Chaldeans.  And the Hebrew men with holy
hearts spake words of wisdom and great learning unto the proud
prince.  Then the lord of Babylon, the haughty king, bade his
thanes and princes on their lives see to it that the three youths
knew no lack of food or raiment all their life long.


LI

(ll. 104-115) Now the famous lord of Babylon was great and
glorious over all the earth, and terrible to the sons of men.  He
lived in insolence and heeded not the law.  And there came to the
great king in his slumber, when the prince had gone to his rest,
a terrible dream that hovered about his heart, how wondrously the
world was wrought, unlike for men, until the world's redemption.
Truth was revealed as he slumbered, that there would come a
bitter end to every rule and to the joys of earth.

(ll. 116-129) Then the wolf-hearted lord of Babylon awoke from
his wine-flushed slumber.  His heart was not blithe; but a fear
was upon him, and dread of the dream.  Yet he could not recall
what the vision had been.  And he summoned his people, all such
as were skilled in magic, and asked the men so gathered what his
dream had been, while men lay sleeping.  He was shaken with
terror and knew no beginning nor word of the dream; but he bade
them tell it to him.  Troubled, the sorcerers answered (for
wisdom was not given them to tell his dream unto the king):

(ll. 130-133) "How may we divine so secret a thing in thy soul, O
king!  how thy dream hath run, or knowledge come to thee of
Fate's decrees, except thou tell us first the beginning of thy
dream?"

(ll. 134-144) And the wolf-hearted king was vexed, and answered
his wise men: "Ye were not so wise above all men as ye told me,
saying ye knew my fate as it should fall, or I should find it in
the future, nor do ye know the dream that bringeth wisdom before
this people.  Ye shall die the death except I know the import of
the dream that lieth heavy on my heart."

(ll. 145-157) But the company there gathered might not divine or
search out knowledge, for it was denied them to tell the king his
dream, or the mysteries of fate, until Daniel, the prophet, wise
and righteous, and beloved of God, came to the palace to
interpret the vision.  He had pre-eminence among that wretched
remnant who needs must serve the heathen king.  God gave him
grace from heaven through the communion of the Holy Spirit; and
an angel of the Lord rehearsed to him all the dream, even as the
king had dreamed it.

(ll. 158-177) Then went Daniel at the dawn of day to tell the
dream unto his lord, recounting wisely the decrees of fate; and
soon the haughty king knew all the dream, its end and its
beginning, that he had dreamed.  And Daniel had great honour and
reward in Babylon among the scribes, after he showed the dream
unto the king which the prince of Babylon had not been able to
remember because of his sins.  Yet could not Daniel bring him to
believe in the might of God, but he began to build an idol in the
plain which men called Dura, which was in the land of the mighty
Babylonians.  The city-warden, the ruler of the realm, reared an
idol before men, a golden image displeasing unto God; he was not
wise, but redeless, reckless, heeding not the right....

((LACUNA--One leaf missing.))

(ll. 178-187) The warriors listened; and when the sound of the
voice of the trumpet came to the city-dwellers, the heathen
people fell upon their knees before the image, and bowed them
down before the idol, and worshipped it, knowing no better
wisdom.  Wickedness they wrought and sin, with hearts perverted,
even as their king.  As their lord before them, the people turned
to folly.  Grim the reward that came on him thereafter!  For he
had sinned.

(ll. 188-208) Now there were three men of Israel in the city of
the king who would not heed their lord's decree, nor offer up
their prayers unto the idol, though trumpets sang aloud among the
host.  They were of the stock of Abraham's children, faithful men
who served Almighty God, the Everlasting Lord in heaven above.
The royal youths gave men to know they would not have or hold the
golden image as a god, but only the Great King, Shepherd of
souls, who granted them His grace.  Oft they said boldly that
they recked naught of the idol, nor could the leader of the
heathen people constrain them unto prayer, nor compel them to go
before the golden image which he had set up as a god.  These
thanes said unto their lord that this was their resolve: that
they were subject to a higher power in this lofty city, "nor will
we ever work idolatry, nor worship the image which thou hast made
to be thy god."

(ll. 209-223) Then the prince of Babylon was angered with them,
and in wrath gave them savage answer: grimly said that they
should quickly worship, or suffer pain and torture, the cruel
surge of flame, except they sought protection of that worst of
demons, the golden image which he had made his god.  Yet would
the youths not hearken in their hearts unto his heathen counsels.
They were resolved to keep the law of God and not forsake the
Lord of hosts, lest that their virtue turn to heathen folly.
They had no longing to seek shelter with false gods, though
bitter the death proclaimed!


LII

(ll. 224-241) Then the fierce king was moved to anger, and bade
them kindle a furnace to torture the youths to death, because
they withstood his will.  The furnace was heated, as fiercely as
might be, with cruel flames of fire.  And the lord of Babylon,
savage and grim, assembled the people, and bade his servants bind
the prophets of God, and cast the young men in the flames.  But
He was ready who wrought them help!  Though the prince so
fiercely thrust them into the heart of the flame, yet a mighty
messenger of God preserved their lives, and brought them help
from heaven, as many learned.  From heaven above the Gracious
Lord of men sent unto them His Holy Spirit.  An angel passed
within the furnace, wherein they suffered torment, and covered
the noble youths with sheltering arms under the roof of fire.
And the heat of the quivering flame could not mar their beauty;
but God preserved them.

(ll. 242-250) Then the heart of the heathen prince was hardened;
he bade them quickly be burned with fire.  The flame rose high,
the furnace was heated; through and through the iron glowed.
Many a slave cast wood therein according to command.  Brands they
bore to the ruddy blaze.  The ruthless king would fain have built
an iron wall about those righteous men, but the flame passed over
them, beloved of God, and with joy slew more than was meet.

(ll. 251-268) The flame passed by the holy men and fell upon
their heathen foes.  The youths were blithe of heart!  Round
about the furnace burned the slaves; the fire took hold upon
those evil men to their hurt, and the prince of Babylon beheld
it.  Blithe were the Hebrew earls, praying to God with zeal and
gladness in the furnace, offering their accustomed praise,
because their lives were spared.  With joyful hearts they
worshipped God, in whose protection the fierce heat of the flame
was turned away.  The noble youths were sheltered from the
flames' assault, and suffered naught of evil.  The roaring
furnace was no more grievous unto them than the shining of the
sun.  The fire harmed them not, but in their hour of danger the
flames passed over them, and fell on those who did them evil.
The heathen slaves departed from the holy youths.  And the beauty
of those cursed men was lessened, whoso had rejoiced in that
work!

(ll. 269-278) Now when the haughty king beheld how in that
torture a miracle was come to pass, and believed his senses, it
seemed to him a wondrous thing.  The righteous men, all three,
were walking unharmed in the fiery furnace, and one was seen
there walking with them, an angel of Almighty God.  No whit of
harm had come upon them, but within the furnace it was most like
as when in the summer season the sun shineth, and the dewfall
cometh at dawn, scattered by the wind.  It was the God of glory
who saved them from that peril.

(ll. 279-282) Then in the hot flame the holy Azariah,
eager-hearted, sang an inspired hymn. The sinless man praised God
and spake this word:

(ll. 283-295) "O Lord of all!  Thy might is strong to save!
Excellent is Thy name in all the earth, sublime and great in
glory!  Thy laws are always sure and just and mighty, even as
Thou art mighty.  Wise and righteous is Thy will, O Lord of
heaven!  O God of spirits, grant us help and favour!  Save us, O
Holy Lord!  Wrapped in flame, we pray Thee for Thy mercy on our
woe, our thraldom and humiliation.

(ll. 295-308) "As we have wrought, so hath it come to pass.  Our
fathers also, city-dwellers, in pride have sinned, and broken Thy
commandments, and scorned a holy life.  We are scattered over all
the spacious earth and driven asunder, cast out from grace.  In
many lands and under many peoples our life is infamous and vile,
and we are subject to the worst of earthly kings, and captive to
grim-hearted men; in heathen lands we suffer thraldom.

(ll. 309-332) "Thanks be to Thee, O Lord of hosts!  that Thou
hast laid this punishment upon us.  Forsake us not, O Lord
Eternal, for Thy mercy's sake which men attribute unto Thee, and
for the covenant, O Lord of glory, Shaper of spirits, Saviour of
men!  which Thou didst give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Thou didst promise them in days of old that Thou wouldest bless
their seed, and that a mighty nation should be born of them, a
race to be exalted as the stars of heaven that trace their
wandering courses even to the strand of ocean, and the sands of
the sea-shore that form the foundations of the deep throughout
the salt sea; even so should they be numberless for untold years.
Fulfil Thine ancient promise now, though few are living!  Show
forth Thy glory and Thy word upon us!  Make known Thy strength
and power, that the Chaldean race and many nations living heathen
lives may learn Thy glory under heaven, and know Thou only art
Eternal God, Wielder of victory, Lord of hosts and all creation,
the Righteous God."

(ll. 333-344) So the holy men praised the loving-kindness of the
Lord, rehearsing the strength of His might.  Then was a gleaming
angel sent from heaven above, with shining face and clothed in
glory, who came to comfort and deliver them with loving favour.
Holy and heavenly bright, he cast aside the blaze of the hot
flame; with mighty strength he swept away and quenched the flame
of fire so that their bodies were not harmed a whir.  But in his
wrath he hurled the fire upon their foes, because of their deeds
of evil.

(ll. 345-361) Then in the furnace, when the angel came, the air
was cool and pleasant, most like the weather in the summer
season, when rain falleth during the day and warm showers from
the clouds.  As is the best of weather, so was it in the furnace
for their comfort through the holy might of God. The burning
flame was quenched and scattered where Hananiah, Azariah, and
Mishael, with brave hearts, were walking in the furnace, and the
angel with them who preserved their lives, who was the fourth.
Devout of heart, the three youths praised the Lord, and called
upon the sons of Israel and all created things of earth to bless
the Everlasting God, the Lord of nations. With understanding
hearts they spake with one accord:


LIII

(ll. 362-408) "O let the beauty of the world, and all Thy works,
bless Thee, our Gracious Father, the heavens and all the angels,
and the shining waters!  Let all, who in Thy great creation dwell
in heavenly glory, bless the Lord of might!  Let all things made,
the shining orbs that circle through the heavens, the sun and
moon, praise Thee in their degree.  Let the stars of heaven, and
dew and the fierce storm, praise Thee.  O let the souls of men
bless the Lord of might!  Let burning fire and radiant summer
praise Thee.  Let night and day and all lands, light and
darkness, heat and cold, praise Thee in their degree.  Let frost
and snow and wintry weather and the flying clouds bless the Lord
of might!  Let the swift, shining lightnings bless Thee!  Let all
the earth, the hills and plains and lofty mountains, the salt
sea-waves and ocean, and the welling springs, praise the
Everlasting God, the Righteous Lord!  Let the whales, and the
birds of the air that fly in the heavens, praise Thee.  Let all
that move in the water, wild beasts and all cattle, bless Thy
name!  Let all men praise Thee, yea!  let Israel bless the Lord,
who giveth all good things.  Let holy men of heart, the spirits
and souls of the righteous, praise the Everlasting God, the Lord
of life, who giveth a reward to all.  Let Hananiah and Azariah
and Mishael praise the Lord!  We worship Thee and bless Thee,
Lord of men, Almighty Father, and Thee, True Son of God, Saviour
of souls and Helper of mankind, and Thee, O Holy Ghost, the God
of wisdom.  We praise Thee, Holy Lord, and worship Thee with
prayer.  Blessed art Thou, and adorned with holy might for ever,
above the world's roof reigning King of heaven, and Lord of life
in every land."

(ll. 409-415) Then Nebuchadnezzar, the lord of that people, spake
unto the princes who stood nigh unto him and said: "Ye beheld, my
princes, how we cast three men to a fiery death in the blazing
flames.  And now, in truth, I see four men therein, except my
sense deceive me."

(ll. 416-429) Then spake a counsellor of the king, wise of heart
and prudent of speech: "This is some marvel which we behold with
our eyes.  Bethink thee now, my lord, of what is fitting.  Know
who it is hath showed this grace upon the youths.  They worship
One Eternal God, and call on Him with zeal by every name.  With
eager words they praise His Majesty, and say that He alone is God
Almighty, Wise King of glory, of earth and heaven.  Call these
men forth from out the furnace, prince of the Chaldeans!  In no
wise is it well that they should linger in that torture longer
than thou hast need."

(ll. 430-439) Then the king bade the young men come before him.
Boldly the noble youths obeyed His word and came as they were
bidden.  The young men rose and went before the heathen king.
Their fetters were burned away and the bonds of the king which
were laid upon them, but their bodies were saved from harm.  For
their beauty was no wise injured, nor was any harm come upon
their garments, nor their hair singed by the fire, but in God's
protection they came forth gladly from that gruesome horror, wise
of heart and favoured by the Holy Ghost.

(ll. 440-457) Then the angel, a faithful servant to the Holy
Lord, departed up to seek eternal bliss on the high roof of the
heavenly kingdom.  And by that marvel he had honoured those who
had deserved it.  The young men praised the Lord before the
heathen host, exhorting them with words of truth, rehearsing many
truthful tokens before the king, until he too believed this was a
God of wonders who freed them from the darkness.  And the mighty
lord of Babylon, the haughty king, decreed among his people that
he was guilty unto death whoso denied this was a glorious God of
might who freed them from that death.  He gave back unto God the
remnants of His captive people and granted favour to his olden
foes.  And their prosperity in Babylon was great and their fame
was known throughout the nation, after they endured that trial by
fire, and obeyed their Lord.  Mighty were their counsels after
God, the Holy Warden of the heavenly kingdom, had shielded them
from harm.

(ll. 458-471) Then, as I have heard, when the lord of Babylon
perceived the marvel that was come to pass within the flames, he
was fain to know how the youths had passed through the blaze of
fire, and overwon the terror of the heated furnace and the
flames, so that the fury of the burning brands and raging furnace
had wrought God's prophets naught of harm, but His defence had
shielded them against that fearful peril.  And the prince
commanded a council, and summoned his people, and there, before
the multitude so gathered, rehearsed the event as it had come to
pass, and the miracle of God made known upon the youths:

(ll. 472-485) "Consider now the holy might and wondrous works of
God.  We saw how He shielded the young men in the furnace from
death and the leaping flames, because they served Him.  He only
is the Lord, Eternal and Almighty, who gives them glory and
abundant weal who preach His gospel.  And He reveals Himself by
many a wonder to holy hearts who seek His favour.  It is well
known that Daniel showed me the interpretation of a secret dream,
which formerly perplexed the minds of many men among my people,
because Almighty God had given him an understanding spirit in his
heart, and strength of wisdom."

(ll. 486-494) So spake the leader of the host, the lord of
Babylon, when he perceived the miracle and God's clear token.
And yet he wrought no whit the better; pride ruled the prince.
His heart was insolent and the thoughts of his heart were
thoughts of pride, more than was meet, until the Lord Almighty
humbled him, as He humbleth many who walk with arrogance.


LIV

(ll. 495-522) Now a dream came unto Nebuchadnezzar in his sleep
and troubled him.  It seemed to him that there stood a tree upon
the earth, wondrous fair, deeply rooted and gleaming with fruit.
Nor was it like to other trees, but it towered unto the stars of
heaven, so that it overshadowed the regions of the world and all
the earth with its boughs and branches, even unto the shores of
the sea.  And as he gazed it seemed to him that the tree made
shelter for the wild beasts, and that it held food for them all,
and likewise that the birds of the air found sustenance in the
fruit of the tree.  And it seemed to him that an angel descended
from the heavens, and spake with a loud voice, commanding the
tree to be cut down, and the wild beasts and the birds to flee
away, when its fall should come.  And he bade that its fruit be
cut off and its branches and boughs, but that the roots of the
tree should abide fast in the earth as a token, until green
shoots should spring again when God granted.  And he bade bind
the mighty tree with brazen fetters and fetters of iron, and thus
bound cast it into torment, that his heart might know that a
mightier than he had power of correction, against whom he might
not prevail.

(ll. 523-537)  Then the earthly king awoke from his slumber, and
his dream was ended.  But fear of it was upon him, and terror of
the vision which God had sent him.  And the haughty king bade
summon his people together, and the leaders of the people, and
asked them all the import of his dream, in no wise thinking that
they knew; but he made trial of them how they would answer.  Then
Daniel, the prophet of God, was called unto judgment, and the
Holy Ghost was sent to him from heaven to strengthen his heart.
In him the lord of men perceived an understanding spirit and
depth of counsel, strength of wisdom, words of judgment.  And
once again he showed forth many a wonder, the mighty works of
God, before the eyes of men.

(ll. 538-550) Then the proud, heathen leader of the host began to
tell his fearful dream, and all the horror of the vision that had
vexed him, and bade him tell the import of this secret thing,
bidding him speak in holy words and search his heart to tell with
truth the meaning of the tree which he saw gleaming, and declare
to him the decrees of fate.  Then he fell silent.  Yet Daniel
clearly saw in the assembly that his prince, the lord of men, was
guilty before God.  The prophet paused; then God's herald,
skilled in the law, made answer to the king:

(ll. 551-579) "This, O prince of men, is no little wonder, which
thou hast seen in thy dream, a tree as high as heaven, and the
holy words, wrathful and full of terror, which the angel spake--that
the tree should be stripped of its branches and fall, where
formerly it stood fast, lying joyless with the beasts, abiding in
a desert place, its roots to remain fast in the earth in
stillness for a season where it stood, as the Voice declared, and
then after seven years to receive increase again!  So shall thy
fortune be brought low!  As the tree grew high unto heaven so art
thou lord and ruler over all the dwellers of earth, and there is
none on earth to withstand thee save God alone.  He shall cut
thee off from thy kingdom and drive thee into exile without
friends, and thy heart shall be changed so that there shall be no
thought in thy heart of worldly joys, nor any reason in thy mind
save the ways of the wild beasts, but thou shalt live a long time
in the forest ranging with the deer.  Thou shalt have no food
save the grass of the field, nor any fixed abiding-place, but the
showers of rain shall drench thee and harass thee even as the
wild beasts, until after seven winters thou shalt believe there
is One God for all mankind, a Lord and Ruler dwelling in the
heavens.

(ll. 580-592) "Yet is it pleasing unto me that the roots remained
fixed in the earth, as the Voice declared, and after seven
seasons received increase.  So shall thy kingdom stand unharmed
of men until thou come again.  Take now, my lord, firm counsel in
thy heart; give alms; defend the needy, and make atonement before
God, ere yet the hour cometh when He shall drive thee from thine
earthly kingdom.  Oft for many peoples God abateth pain and woe,
if they but earnestly repent them of their sins, ere His avenging
wrath, with fatal doom, hath laid them low."

(ll. 593-597) But Daniel was not able to speak these many words
of truth, with craft of wisdom, to his lord, so that the mighty
ruler of the world would heed; but pride ruled his heart.  And
bitter was his atonement!

(ll. 598-607) And as the king of the Chaldeans ruled his realm,
and beheld the city of Babylon in its prosperity towering up to
heaven, the city which the prince had built with many a wonder
for his people, and the fields of the Shinarites wide-stretching
round about, then the king began to utter boastful words.  He
became perverse and arrogant of heart, beyond all men, because of
the special gifts which God had given him, a mighty kingdom and
the world to rule in the life of men:

(ll. 608-611) "Thou art the mighty city, famed afar, which I have
builded to my honour, a spacious kingdom.  I will have rest in
thee, a dwelling and a home."

(ll. 612-621) Then the lord of men was smitten for his boasting,
and driven into exile, arrogant of heart beyond all men.  Even as
in the days of strife, when God's swift wrath and anger smote him
from the heavens, Nebuchadnezzar trod the bitterest path unto
God's vengeance that ever living men have trod.  Seven winters
together the king of that fair city suffered torment, a
desert-life with beasts.

(ll. 622-639) Then the wretched man, companion of the beasts,
looked up through the flying clouds; and he knew in his heart
that there was a Lord and King of heaven, and one Eternal Spirit
ruling over the sons of men.  And he was recovered from the
madness which long had been upon him, vexing the heart and soul
of the king.  His heart was turned again unto men and his mind
unto thoughts of God, after he came to know Him.  And the
wretched man rose up and came again among men, a naked wanderer
acknowledging his sin, a strange exile without clothing, and of
humbler heart than the lord of men had been in his boasting.
Behind its lord the world had stood, behind the prince his home
and native land, unchanged for seven winters together, so that
his kingdom had not lessened under heaven until its ruler came
again.

(ll. 640-656) Then was the lord of Babylon once more seated upon
his throne; he had a better heart, a clearer faith in the Lord of
life, knowing that God dealeth unto every man weal or woe as He
desireth.  The lord of nations was not slow to heed the counsels
of his wise men, but far and wide rehearsed the might of God,
where he had power of proclamation.  He told his people of his
wanderings, his far journeys with the beasts, until the spirit of
the Lord God came upon him and thoughts of wisdom, when he looked
up to heaven.  Fate was fulfilled, the wonder come to pass, the
dream come true, the punishment endured, the doom awarded, even
as Daniel said aforetime that the king would suffer downfall for
his pride, and earnestly proclaimed it before men, by the might
of God.

(ll. 657-674) Then for a long time Daniel gave judgment and
counsel in Babylon unto the city-dwellers.  And after
Nebuchadnezzar, comrade and companion of the wild beasts,
returned from his wandering exile, the prince of the Chaldeans,
the wise and mighty leader of the folk, ruled his spacious
kingdom, guarding his treasure and the lofty city, until death
came upon him.  And there was no man to withstand him upon earth
till God through death took his high kingdom from him. Thereafter
his descendants prospered greatly in that mighty stronghold, in
the city of earls, enjoying wealth and twisted gold, a mighty
treasure, when their lord lay dead.


LV

(ll. 675-685) And after him among that people arose a third
generation, and Belshazzar ruled the city and the kingdom until
his heart grew great with insolence and hateful pride.  And the
Chaldean rule was ended!  For the Lord bestowed the kingdom upon
the Medes and Persians for a space of time, and let the might of
Babylon diminish, which the heroes should have held.  But He knew
that they were sinful men who would have ruled the realm.

(ll. 686-702) The lord of the Medes, as he sat in his stronghold,
resolved on that which none had done before him, that he would
lay waste Babylon, the city of earls, where the princes within
the walls dispensed the treasure.  Now the city of Babylon was
the most famous of all the fortresses of men, the mightiest and
most widely known of all that men inhabit, until Belshazzar in
his boasting tempted God.  They sat at wine within their walls,
fearing not the hate of any foe, though a hostile folk with
mighty hosts in armour were coming up against them, even against
the city of Babylon to destroy it.  And the Chaldean king and his
kinsmen sat feasting on the last day.

(ll. 703-711) Now when the leader of the host was drunk with wine
he bade them bring the treasure of Israel, the holy vessels of
the sacrifice, and the gold which the Chaldean warriors and their
legions had captured in Jerusalem, when they destroyed the might
of Judah with the sword, boasting exceedingly, with tumult
seizing on the kindly folk and gleaming treasure, as they
plundered the temple and the shrine of Solomon.

(ll. 712-726) Then was the lord of cities blithe in his heart,
boasting fiercely and defying God, and said his gods were
mightier to save, and greater, than the Eternal Lord of Israel.
But, as he gazed, there came a dreadful token before men within
the hall, that he had spoken a lie before his people.  The hand
of an angel of God appeared within the lofty hall, a sight of
terror, and wrote before the eyes of men upon the wall in scarlet
letters and words of mystery.  Then the heart of the king was
troubled within him and sore afraid because of the sign; within
the hall he beheld the hand of an angel writing the doom of the
Shinarites.

(ll. 727-736) But the multitude, the host within the hall,
debated what the hand had written for a sign to the city-dwellers.
And many came to see the wonder.  They searched the thoughts of
their hearts to know what the hand of the angel had written.  Nor
could the nobles and magicians read the angel's message till
Daniel, wise and righteous, loved of God, came to the hall.  And
his heart was filled with wisdom sent from God.

(ll. 737-742) Then, as I have heard, the city-dwellers sought to
tempt Daniel with gifts to read the writing and tell the import
of the mystery.  But the prophet of God, skilled in the law and
wise of heart, made answer to them:

(ll. 743-765) "Not for gain do I pronounce God's judgments to the
people, nor of mine own strength, but freely will I tell thy
fate, and the meaning of the words thou shalt not change.  In
thine insolence thou hast given into the hands of men the vessels
of the sacrifice, and in them drunk to devils, which formerly the
Israelites employed in holy rites before the ark of God, till
pride seduced them and drunken thoughts.  So shall it be with
thee!  Never would thy lord before thee lay hands of insolence
upon God's golden vessels, nor boast thereof, although it was his
legions that plundered Israel's treasure.  But after the Lord of
glory showed forth His wonders upon him, the lord of nations
often spake before his people in words of truth, and said that
He alone was Lord and Ruler of creation who gave him blameless
glory in his earthly kingdom and great prosperity.  But thou
deniest that He is the Living God who ruleth over devils..."

((LACUNA of indeterminate length))



CHRIST AND SATAN



LIBER II

I

THE LAMENT OF THE FALLEN ANGELS

(ll. 1-18) It is revealed to those who dwell on earth that God
had strength and power when He wrought the borders of the world.
By His wondrous might He established the sun and moon, the rocks
and earth and the oceanstream, water and clouds.  By His strength
the Lord upholdeth all the deep expanse, and middle-earth.  The
Son of God beholdeth from the heavens the sea and its foundations:
He numbereth every drop of the showers of rain.  By His wondrous
power He hath ordained the number of the days.  Even so in six
days, by His spirit's might, the Lord in heaven devised the valleys
of the world and the high hills, and founded them. Who is there
that clearly knoweth all that mighty work except Eternal God?

(ll. 19-33) Joys He dealeth out and riches.  He first created
Adam, and a noble race, the angel princes, which later perished
utterly.  For, it seemed to them in their hearts it well might be
that they themselves were lords of heaven, princes of glory.
Then a worse fate befell them, and they went to find a home in
hell, the foul abyss, where they must needs endure grim woe and
surging flame, no more possessing radiance of glory or high-built
halls in heaven; but they must needs plunge downward to those
depths of fiery flame, down to the bottomless abyss, insatiate
and rapacious.  God only knoweth how He hath condemned that
guilty host.

(ll. 34-50) The Old One crieth out of hell, with horrible voice
uttereth words accursed: "Whither is fled the glory of the
angels, which we should have in heaven?  This is a home of
darkness, terribly bound with fettering bonds of fire.  The floor
of hell is ablaze, and flaming with poison.  The end is now not
far when we must suffer torment, pain, and woe, no whit
possessing bliss in heavenly glory, nor joy, in her high halls.
Lo!  once we knew great bliss before the face of God, and songs
of praise in heaven in happier hours, where now stand noble
spirits round about Eternal God in His high hall, worshipping the
Lord with words and works.  And here in torment I must needs
abide in bonds, nor ever hope for any better home, because of my
insolent pride."

(ll. 51-64) Then answered the foul fiends, black and sinful,
chained in torment: "Thou with thy lies didst teach us not to
serve the Saviour!  To thee alone it seemed that thou hadst power
of all things in heaven and earth, that thou wert Holy God, even
the Creator.  Now thou art bound, thou wretched fiend, with bonds
of flame.  In thy splendour thou didst think the world was thine,
and power of all things, and we, the angels, with thee.
Loathsome is thy face!  Sorely have we suffered for thy lies!
Thou saidest that thy son was Lord of men.  Now is thy woe the
greater."

(ll. 65-74) So with bitter words and moaning voices the sinful
spirits spake unto their lord.  Christ had cast them out, and
banished them from joy.  They had lost the radiant light of God
in heaven through overweening pride.  For all their joy they had
the floors of hell and burning pain.  Pale, their beauty marred,
the fallen angels, miserable wretches, wandered through that
loathsome pit, because of the presumptuous deeds which formerly
they wrought.


II

(ll. 75-80) Then once more spake the leader of the fiends; he was
chastened anew, and racked with pangs of torment.  Black with
fire and poison, he began to speak; no pleasant joy was this as
he poured forth his words in pain:

(ll. 81-92) "I was once a holy angel, dear unto God in heaven,
and knew great joy before the face of the Lord God, likewise this
multitude.  But I resolved in my heart to overthrow the Lord of
glory, the Son of God, and have myself the power to rule the
world, and all this wretched host which I have led unto a home in
hell.  Bethink ye of the token and the curse, that I was
banished, deep below the earth, in the bottomless abyss. I have
led you all from out your native home unto a house of bondage.

(ll. 92-105) "Here is no glory of the blessed, neither wine-halls
of the proud, nor worldly joys nor angel throngs, nor may we have
possession of high heaven.  This loathsome dwelling burns with
fire.  I am God's foe.  Dragons dwell ever at the gates of hell,
inflamed and furious; they may not help us!  This woeful house is
filled with torment.  In this deep darkness there is yet no place
to shelter us, that we may hide therein.  Here is the adder's
hiss; here serpents dwell.  Firmly the bonds of torment are
fastened upon us.  Fierce are the fiends, swarthy and black.
Here never gleameth day in the gloom of hell-shadows, nor the
radiant light of God.

(ll. 106-124) "Once I had power and glory, before I earned God's
judgment on my sin in this loathsome realm, upon the floor of
hell.  Now I have come, and brought a host of fiends, unto this
home of darkness.  But, flying forth from hell from time to time,
I needs must visit every land, and others of you also, who had
part in our presumptuous deeds.  We need not hope the King of
glory will ever grant us a home and dwelling, as He did of old,
and everlasting power.  For the Son of God hath power of all
things, of glory and affliction.  Wherefore, downcast and
wretched, I must wander far, an exile journey, stripped of glory,
shorn of virtue, bereft of joy in heaven among the angels,
because I said of old that I was King of glory and Lord of all."


III

(ll. 125-128) But a worse fate befell him!  So the accursed
spirit, doomed to woe, lamented his afflictions. (And through the
foul abyss a flame of fire raged, with venom mingled):

(ll. 129-141) "I am so large of limb there is no place in this
wide hall to hide me, sore wounded with my sins.  Both heat and
cold by turns are mingled here.  At times I hear the hell-slaves
howling, mourning these realms of pain beneath the earth; at
times men naked strive with serpents.  All this windy hall is
filled with horror!  Never shall I know a happier home, nor any
town or mansion; nor ever shall mine eyes behold the shining
world again.

(ll. 142-157) "Worse is it now for me that ever I knew the light
of glory with the angels, or melody in heaven, where blessed
souls are lapped in music by the Son of God.  I may not injure
any soul save those alone which He rejecteth.  Those may I lead
home into bondage, and bring them to their dwelling in the grim
abyss.  Changed are we all from what we were of old on high, in
beauty and in honour.  Oft, as disciples round our well-loved
Lord, we brought the sons of glory to the Saviour's arms, and
lifted up our songs of praise, and worshipped Him.  But now I am
stained with evil, and wounded with my sins.  In hell-fire
burning bonds of pain shall sear my back, nor may I ever hope for
any future good."

(ll. 158-162) Then once more the loathsome fiend from hell,
accursed in his woe, bewailed his endless torment.  His words
flew up like sparks, most like to poison, as he hissed them
forth:

(ll. 162-175) "O!  the majesty of God, the might of the Creator!
O!  Thou Lord of heavenly hosts!  Farewell to earth, and the
gleaming light of day!  Farewell the bliss of God, the angel
hosts, the heavens above!  Alas!  that I have lost eternal joy,
that never again with my hands may I lay hold on heaven, nor
thitherward lift up mine eyes, nor hear in mine ears the ringing
voice of the trumpet, because I would have driven from His throne
the Lord, the Son of God, and seized myself the power of majesty
and joy and bliss.

(ll. 176-188) "Then a worse fate befell me than I could well
foresee!  I am rejected from the heavenly host, cast out from
light into this loathsome home.  I may not well bethink me how I
fell thus low, into this deep abyss, stained with my sins, and
cast out from the world.  Now I know that he will forfeit all
eternal joy who thinketh not to serve the King of heaven and
please the Lord.  Needs must I undergo correction, vengeance and
punishment and pain, stripped of every good, stained by my former
deeds, because I thought to drive God from His throne, the Lord
of hosts.  Now, sorrowful and full of care, I needs must go an
exile-journey, a wandering wide."


IV

(ll. 189-208) Then God's foe went to hell, wherein he was abased,
and his thanes with him, covetous and greedy, when the Lord God
hurled them down into that burning house whose name is hell.
Wherefore let every man take thought in his heart that he may not
be displeasing to the Son of God, remembering how the black
fiends were undone by pride.  And let us choose as our delight
the Lord of hosts, the Prince of angels, and eternal joy in
heaven above.  He showed that He had strength and wondrous power,
when from His lofty throne He drove that great host into bondage.
Let us be mindful of the Holy Lord, eternal in glory, and choose
a home on high with Christ, the Lord of all, the King of kings.
With blithe thoughts in our hearts, and peace and wisdom, let us
be mindful of righteousness and truth, when we think to kneel
before His royal throne, and pray the Lord for mercy.

(ll. 209-223) It behooveth him who dwelleth in these worldly joys
to shine in beauty when he seeketh another life, and a land much
fairer than this earth.  That is a land of beauty and of joy,
with fruits that brightly gleam among the cities.  That is a
boundless realm, the home of the blessed in heaven, acceptable to
Christ.  Let us turn thither where, in that dear home, the
Saviour sitteth, Lord of victories, and round about His throne in
radiant whiteness stand angel legions and all blessed souls, the
holy heavenly hosts, and praise the Lord with words and works.
Their beauty gleameth with the King of glory, world without end.


V

(ll. 224-227) And further still, as I have heard, the fiends
confessed.  Their sin and punishment lay heavy on them.  In their
presumptuous pride they had forgot the King of glory. Straightway
in other words they spake:

(ll. 228-244) "Now is it seen that we have sinned in heaven, and
now must ever wage a hapless war against the might of God.  We
might have had our dwelling in the light of glory, in thousands
serving Holy God, and chanting hymns about His throne.  And while
we dwelt there, and abode in bliss, came strains of heavenly
music on our ears, and the voice of the trumpet.  Bright of word
arose the Prince of angels, and all His saints bowed down before
Him.  The Eternal Lord Triumphant rose and stood above us, and
each day blessed that gentle throng, and His beloved Son, Shaper
of souls.  And God Himself was merciful to all who came within
that kingdom, and had believed in Him on earth.

(ll. 245-247) "But it seemed to me that the Prince was stern and
hard of heart; and I began to go forth alone among the angels,
and said unto them all:

(ll. 248-253) "'I can show you enduring counsel, if ye will trust
my strength.  Let us scorn this mighty Prince, the Lord of hosts,
and possess us of the radiance of His glory to be our own.  For
this is empty boasting which we have borne so long.'


VI

(ll. 254-268) "And so it was we strove to drive the Lord from His
dear home, the King from out His city.  But widely is it known
that we must dwell in exile, in the grim depths of heil.  God
holdeth His kingdom.  He only is the King, Eternal Lord, Creator
strong and mighty, whose anger smote us down.  Henceforth this
host must lie here in their sin, some flying in the air and
speeding over earth.  But round about each spirit fire burneth,
though he be up on high.  Yet may he never lay his hand upon
those souls who from the earth in blessedness seek heaven.  But I
may seize God's foes, all heathen slaves, and drag them down into
the pit.

(ll. 269-278) "Some must needs wander through all lands, sowing
dissension in the tribes of men throughout the earth.  But I must
suffer all things, in the pangs of flame, sick and sorrowful,
lamenting here my lost possessions, which once I owned, while
still my home was in the heavens.  Will the Eternal grant us ever
again a home and dwelling in the heavenly kingdom, as He did of
old?"

(ll. 279-297) So wailed God's adversaries, as they burned in
hell.  God, the Lord, was moved to wrath against them for their
blasphemy.  Wherefore should every living man, whose heart is
good, resolve to banish sinful thoughts and loathsome evil.  Let
us be ever mindful in our hearts of the Creator's might, and
prepare a green path before us unto the angels.  There is
Almighty God, and the Son of God will fold us in His arms, if we
on earth take thought of this beforehand, and trust His holy
help.  Then will He not forsake us, but will grant us life among
the angels, and blessed joy.  The radiant Lord will show us
stable dwellings, and gleaming city-walls.  Brightly shine the
souls of the blessed, freed from sorrow, evermore possessing
cities and a kingly throne.

(ll. 297-314) O may we all proclaim it, ere it be too late, and
rehearse it unto men upon the earth, unlock with skill the
mysteries of God, and wisely understand them!  A thousand angels
shall come out to meet us, if thitherward we take our way, and
have deserved this bliss on earth.  He shall be blessed whoso
scorneth evil and is pleasing unto God, overcoming sin as He hath
said.  The righteous, crowned with beauty, in their Father's
kingdom, shall shine like to the sun in the City of Refuge, where
their Lord, the Father of mankind, shall fold them in His arms,
and lovingly uplift them to the light of heaven, where they may
dwell for ever with the King of glory, possessing joy of joys
with the Lord God, for ever and for ever without end.


VII

(ll. 315-333) Alas!  how rashly did the cursed fiend resolve to
disobey the King of heaven, the Comfort-bringing Father.  With
venom burned and blazed the floor of hell beneath the captive's
feet.  The fiends went howling through those windy halls, wailing
their woe.  The sin and evil of that multitude were fiercely
purged by fire.  Grievous their fate!  And their prince, who came
there first of all the host, was lettered fast in fire and flame;
that was unending torment!  For ever must his thanes inhabit
there that loathsome realm, nor ever in heaven above hear holy
joy, where they had long had pleasant service with the angels;
all good things had they lost, and might not dwell save in the
pit of hell, in that accursed hall where sounds of weeping are
heard afar, gnashing of teeth and lamentation.

(ll. 334-354) They have no hope but only frost and fire, torture
and pain and swarming serpents, dragons and adders and a house of
darkness.  He who stood within twelve miles of hell might hear a
gnashing of teeth, loud and full of woe.  God's adversaries
wandered throughout hell, burning with flame above and below (on
every side was torture); oppressed with pain, bereft of joy, and
shorn of glory, they bitterly lamented that ever they had planned
to strip the Saviour of His heavenly kingdom, when they had their
home on high.  But He held rightfully the courts of heaven and
His holy throne.

(ll. 355-364) No one is so cunning or so wise, or hath such
understanding, save God alone, that he may describe the radiant
light of heaven; how, by the might of God, the sun there shineth
round about that splendid host, where angels have eternal joy,
and saints chant hymns before the face of God.  And there are
blessed souls, who come from earth bearing in their bosoms
fragrant blossoms and pleasant herbs--these are the words of
God.  The Father of mankind shall fold them in His arms, and with
His right hand bless them and lead them to the light, where they
shall have eternal life, a heavenly home, a radiant city-dwelling,
for ever and for ever.  He shall have bliss whoso inclineth to
obey his Saviour.  Well shall it be with him who may obtain it!


VIII

THE HARROWING OF HELL

(ll. 365-376) Within God's kingdom in the days of old the angel
prince was called "Light-bearer," Lucifer.  But he stirred up
strife in heaven and turned to insolence and pride.  Darkly Satan
planned to build a lofty throne in heaven, with the Eternal God.
He was their lord, the prince of evil.  But he repented when he
needs must sink to hell, and with his thanes must feel the
Saviour's wrath; never thereafter might they look upon Eternal
God for ever.

(ll. 377-384) Then terror came upon them, and crashing thunder
went before the Judge, who bowed and burst the doors of hell.
And bliss came unto men when they beheld their Saviour's face.
But the hearts of that doomed folk, that dread host named
aforetime, were sore afraid.  They were smitten with terror
throughout their windy hall, and wailed aloud:

(ll. 385-397) "Bitter is this Storm that burst upon us, the Angel
Prince, the Warrior with His legions.  Before Him shineth a
fairer light than ever our eyes beheld, save when we dwelt in
heaven among the angels.  Now will He end, by power of His glory,
the torment we inflict.  Lo! this Terror cometh, with thunders
before the face of God, and soon this wretched throng shall know
affliction.  It is the Son of God, the Lord of angels.  He
leadeth souls up out of hell, and we shall be abased hereafter by
His avenging wrath."

(ll. 398-407) By His might the Lord descended into hell, unto the
sons of men.  For He was fain to lead forth countless thousands
to their native home.  Then came the sound of angel legions, and
thunder at the blush of dawn.  The Lord Himself had overcome the
Fiend; the deadly strife began at dawn when the terror fell upon
them.  He let the blessed souls, the race of Adam, mount upward
unto heaven.  Yet Eve might not see heaven until she spake:

(ll. 408-419) "I, only, brought Thy wrath upon us, Eternal Lord,
when we two ate the apple through the serpent's guile, Adam and
I, as we should not have done.  The fiend, who now doth burn for
ever in his bonds, told us that so we should have blessing and a
holy home, and heaven to rule.  And we believed the words of the
Accursed, and stretched our hands unto the holy tree and plucked
its shining fruit.  Bitter the price we paid, when we must needs
sink downward to this flaming pit, and there abide for many
thousand winters, dreadfully burning.

(ll. 420-434) "Now I beseech Thee, Lord of heaven, by this host,
the angel legions which Thou leadest hither, that I may be
delivered out of hell, with all my kindred.  Three nights ago a
servant of the Saviour came to hell.  Now is he fast in bondage,
spent with pain, for the King of glory was incensed against him
because of his presumption.  Thou saidest unto us in truth that
God Himself would come to all who dwell in hell.  Then everyone
arose, and leaned upon his arm, and rested on his hand; though
racked with pangs of hell, yet in their torment they rejoiced
because their Lord was coming unto hell to bring them aid."

(ll. 435-440) And she lifted up her hands unto the King of
heaven, beseeching mercy of the Lord for Mary's sake: "Lo!  Of my
daughter wast Thou born, O Lord, to help mankind on earth.  Now
is it seen that Thou art God indeed, the Everlasting Source of
all creation."


IX

(ll. 441-454) Then the Eternal Lord let all that host mount
upward unto glory.  But on the fiends He fastened bonds of
torment, and thrust them down into the depths of darkness,
bitterly abashed, where darkly Satan rules, a woeful wretch, and
with him the foul fiends, forspent with pain.  Never may they see
the light of glory, but only bell's abyss, nor ever hope for
their return, because the Lord God was incensed against them, and
gave them bonds of torment for their portion, and gruesome
horror, death-shadows dark and dim, the burning pit of hell, and
fear of death.

(ll. 455-467) Then was there gladness when the host returned unto
their native home, and with them the Eternal Lord of men, unto
His glorious city.  With their hands the race of Abraham, the
holy prophets, bore Him up unto His home.  Even as the prophets
had foretold in days of old, the Lord had conquered death, and
overcome the Fiend.  All this befell at dawn before the blush of
day, when thunder came, loud crashing from the heavens, and God
bowed down and brake the doors of hell.  The fiends' strength
lessened when they saw the radiant light.

(ll. 468-478) And the Son of God was sitting with His host, and
spake with words of truth: "Wise spirits!  By My might I wrought
you--first Adam and this noble woman.  And they begat, by God's
will, forty children, so that a multitude were born thereafter on
the earth, and many a winter men dwelt in their home, until it
came to pass the fiend by deeds of evil brought God's mercy to an
end.  Now sin has spread through all the world!

(ll. 479-486) "For in the new Paradise I placed a tree with
spreading branches, whose boughs bore apples, and ye two ate the
gleaming fruit according as the fiend, the thane of hell, gave
bidding.  Wherefore ye journeyed to the burning depths of hell,
because ye disobeyed the word of God, and tasted of this horror.
The foul fiend stood beside you, and gave you evil thoughts.

(ll. 487-498) "But My heart repented that My handiwork should
suffer prison-bondage!  There was no power of men, nor might of
angels, no work of the prophets, nor wisdom of mortal men, that
could bring you help, but only God, the Saviour, who had ordained
that punishment in vengeance.  And from His home on high He came
to earth, being born of a virgin, and suffered many tortures in
the world, and much affliction.  And many men, the rulers of the
state, conspired against Me night and day, how they might slay
Me.

(ll. 499-511) "Then was the time fulfilled, and I had lived for
three-and-thirty winters in the world before My passion.  Long
was I mindful of this multitude and of My home, that I might lead
them up from bondage to their native land, where they may have
God's judgments, and the glory of the heavenly hosts, dwelling in
joy and knowing bliss of heaven, a thousand fold.  Upon the
cross, when sharp spears pierced Me, and the young man smote Me,
hanging on the tree, yea!  even then I interceded for you; and I
came again unto eternal joys, and to the presence of the Holy
Lord."


X

(ll. 512-523) Thus spake the Lord of glory, Maker of mankind,
early in the morning when the Lord God rose from death.  There
was no stone so firmly fastened, though it were bound about with
iron, that might withstand His wondrous might; but the Lord of
angels went forth from His prison, and bade bright angels tell
His eleven disciples, and say especially to Simon Peter that he
might see God, Steadfast and Eternal, in Galilee, as he had done
aforetime.

(ll. 524-534) Then the disciples, as I have heard, were filled
with the Spirit, and went together into Galilee unto the Holy Son
of God, beholding where the Son of the Creator, the Eternal Lord,
was risen.  And the disciples ran and came where the Eternal Lord
was standing, and fell upon the ground, and knelt before His
feet, giving thanks to God because once more, as it was come to
pass, they might behold the Prince of angels.  And straightway
Simon Peter spake:

(ll. 535-539) "Is it Thou, O Lord God, crowned with glory?  A
little while ago we saw how heathen men laid grievous bonds upon
Thee!  And bitterly shall they repent, when they behold their
end."

(ll. 540-556) But some could not believe it in their hearts.  And
one, called Didymus, was dear before he laid his hand upon his
Saviour's side wherefrom His blood had fallen to the ground, a
bath of baptism.  That was a glorious deed, the passion of the
Lord our God.  He mounted up upon the tree, and with His great
heart shed His blood upon the cross.  Wherefore at all times men
should thank their Lord by words and works, because He led us out
of bondage to our home and native land, where we may have God's
judgments and the glory of the heavenly host, and dwell in joy.
To us the radiant light of glory is revealed, to such as have
good thoughts.


XI

(ll. 557-567) Then was the Lord Eternal forty days on earth,
followed of the people and revealed to men, before the Prince of
city-dwellers brought the Holy Spirit to the great creation, the
heavenly kingdom.  The King of angels and the Lord of hosts
ascended up on high.  Then came celestial melodies in holiness
from heaven.  The hand of God appeared and He received the
Prince; the Lord of heaven led Him to His holy home.  And round
about Him throngs of angels flew in thousands.

(ll. 568-578) And it befell, while yet the Saviour Christ abode
with men, that on the night before the last He strengthened with
His spirit His disciples, the twelve apostles.  The Living God
ordained unnumbered souls.  Of these was Judas, who betrayed the
Glorious Lord, our Saviour, to be a sacrifice.  Little did that
undertaking prosper when he sold the Son of God for silver
treasure.  The foul fiend gave him grim requital, deep in hell.

(ll. 579-596) The Son now sitteth on the right hand of the
Father; each day the Lord of hosts giveth help and healing to the
sons of men throughout the earth.  Full widely is it known to
many men that He alone, by power of His glory, is Maker and Ruler
of all created things.  The Holy Lord of angels sitteth with the
prophets in heaven above; the Son of glory hath His throne amid
the heavens, and by His healing leadeth us up thither to the
light, where we may sit with God on high among the angels, and
have that radiance where His holy host now dwelleth, and live in
joy.  There is the blessedness of glory radiantly revealed!  Let
us take thought to serve the Saviour gladly and be pleasing unto
Christ!  There is more glorious life than we may ever gain on
earth.


XII

(ll. 597-607) Now hath the Great Prince, the Almighty Lord, made
intercession for us.  On the day of doom God biddeth the
archangels, with a mighty blast, to sound the trumpet over the
city-dwellings, through all the borders of the world.  Then shall
men wake from the earth; the dead shall arise from the dust,
through the might of God.  Longest of days shall that be,
greatest of tumults, heard afar, when the Saviour cometh, the
Lord, with clouds surrounded, descending upon earth.

(ll. 608-615) Then will He separate the fair and foul, the good
and evil, into two companies.  And the righteous shall mount to
their rest at the right hand of God, they shall be blithe as they
enter the city, the kingdom of God.  With His right hand the Lord
of creation shall bless them, and say before all:

(ll. 615-618) "Ye are welcome!  Enter now the heavenly kingdom,
into the light of glory.  There shall ye rest for ever without
end."

(ll. 619-625) But the guilty souls that have sinned shall stand
and tremble when the Son of God shall judge them by His wondrous
might; they shall hope they may ascend to that fair city with the
angels, as the others did.  But the Eternal Lord shall speak to
them, and say before them all:

(ll. 626-627) "Descend now quickly, ye accursed, into the house
of pain.  I know you not."

(ll. 628-646) And straightway at these words hell's captives,
cursed spirits, shall drag them down by thousands, leading them
thither to the home of fiends, and thrust them deep down in the
narrow pit.  Never may they return, but there they needs must
suffer torturing pain, imprisonment, and bonds, and the cold
ground, endure the depths of hell and devils' discourse, black
fiends with hate reviling them for sin, because they often have
forgot the Lord, Eternal God, who should have been their hope.
Wherefore let us resolve while in the world to serve the Saviour
gladly by God's grace, be mindful of the spirit's joy, and how
the blessed sons of God abide on high in radiant glory.

(ll. 647-655) There is a golden gate adorned with gems,
enwreathed with joy, for those who enter in God's kingdom, and
win the light of glory.  About the walls stand radiant angel
spirits and blessed souls who pass from earth to heaven.  There
are martyrs pleasing unto God, and patriarchs with holy voices
praising God, the King within His city, saying:

(ll. 656-658) "Thou art the Lord of men, the Heavenly Judge and
Prince of angels!  Thou hast led the sons of earth unto this
blessed home!"

(ll 659-662) So the thanes about their Prince shall praise the
Lord of glory.  There shall be song and splendour round His
throne.  For He is King indeed, and Lord of all things in the
eternal creation!


THE TEMPTATION

(ll. 663-673) He is the Lord, the Prince of angels, who died for
us; and, in the fullness of His mercy, the Maker of mankind once
fasted forty days.  And it came to pass that the Accursed Fiend,
who was driven out of heaven and sank to hell, tempted the Lord
of all creation, bringing in his arms great stones, and bidding
Him make loaves to stay His hunger, "if Thou have so much power."
But the Eternal Lord made answer unto him:

(ll. 674-675) "Knowest thou not, accursed, it was written...."

((LACUNA of indeterminate length.))

(ll. 676-678) "....save Me alone?  But Thou, O Lord of victory,
hast ordained the light for living souls, reward unending in the
heavenly kingdom, and holy joys."

(ll. 679-682) Then the malicious, evil spirit in derision lifted
Him up in his hands, and set Him upon his shoulder, and ascended
a high mountain, and placed the Lord God on a peak thereof:

(ll. 683-688) "Gaze now full widely over the dwellers of earth.
The world and the inhabitants thereof will I give into Thy hand.
Take now from me the city and the shining home which I will give
Thee in the heavenly kingdom, that Thou mayest truly be the King
of men and angels, as Thou hast thought."

(ll. 689-709) Then answered the Eternal Lord: "Depart, thou
cursed Satan, into the house of pain; for thee is punishment
prepared, and not God's kingdom.  By most high might I bid thee
bring no hope to such as dwell in hell, but tell them now of
this, thy greatest woe, that thou hast met the Maker of creation,
the Lord of men.  Get thee behind Me!  Know, accursed fiend, how
measureless and wide and dreary is the pit of hell!  Measure it
with thy hands, take hold upon its bottom.  Go, then, until thou
knowest all the circle of it; measure it first from above even
unto the abyss.  Measure how broad the black mist stretches.
Then shalt thou know more clearly that thou strivest against God,
when thou hast measured with thy hands how high and deep is hell,
the grim grave-house, within.  Go quickly, that thou measure, ere
two hours are past, the home allotted thee."

(ll. 710-728) Then vengeance came upon the fiend.  Satan, the
cursed monster, fled away and sank to hell.  And first he
measured with his hands its torment and its woe.  The black flame
leaped against the evil spirit; and he beheld the captives as
they lay in hell.  And there rose a howling throughout hell, when
their eyes fell on the fiend.  God's foes had striven... the
black evil spirit, so that he stood upon the floor of hell, and
it seemed to him that from the pit to the doors of hell was an
hundred thousand miles in reckoning, as the Almighty Lord had
bidden him, for his sin, to measure all his torment.  And he
remembered as he stood in the depths of hell!  The foul fiend
with his eyes gazed through the loathsome den, until its
overwhelming horror, the host of devils... then mounted up...
With words of malice the accursed fiends began to speak and say:

(ll. 728-730) "Lo! thus may evil be upon thee always!  Thou didst
not wish for good!"



FINIT LIBER II.  AMEN.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Codex Junius 11, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CODEX JUNIUS 11 ***

***** This file should be named 618.txt or 618.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/618/

Produced by Douglas B. Killings.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
