The Project Gutenberg EBook of Somebody's Little Girl, by Martha Young

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Somebody's Little Girl

Author: Martha Young

Release Date: January 22, 2008 [EBook #702]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL ***









SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL

by Martha Young



Dedication

  To
  Two Little Elizabeths:
  Elizabeth Young
  and
  Elizabeth Magruder




SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL


If I were just to tell the things that Bessie Bell remembered I should
tell you some very strange things.  Bessie Bell did not know whether
she remembered them, or just knew them, or whether they just grew,
those strange things in some strange country that never was anywhere in
the world; for when Bessie Bell tried to tell about those strange
things great grown wise people said: "No, no, Bessie Bell, there is
nothing in the world like that."

So Bessie Bell just remembered and wondered.

She remembered how somewhere, sometime, there was a window where you
could look out and see everything green, little and green, and always
changing and moving, away, away--beyond everything little, and green,
and moving all the time.  But great grown wise folks said: "No, there
is no window in all the world like that."

And once when some one gave Bessie Bell a little round red apple she
caught her breath very quickly and her little heart jumped and then
thumped very loudly (that is the way it seemed to her) and she
remembered: Little apple trees all just alike, and little apple trees
in rows all just alike on top of those and again on top of those until
they came to a great row of big round red apples on top of all.

Rut great grown people said: "No, no, Bessie Bell, there are no apple
trees in all the world like that."

And one time Bessie Bell was at a pretty house and somebody sat her on
a little low chair and said: "Keep still, Bessie Bell."

She kept still so long that at last she began to be afraid to move at
all, and she got afraid even to crook up her little finger for fear it
would pop off loud,--she had kept still so long that all her round
little fingers and her round little legs felt so stiff.

Then one, great grown person said: "She seems a very quiet child." And
the other said: "She is a very quiet child--sometimes."

But just then Bessie Bell turned her head, and though her round little
neck felt stiff it did not pop!--and she saw--something in a corner
that was blue, green, and brown, and soft, and she forgot how afraid to
move she was, and she forgot how stiff she thought she was, and she
forgot how still she was told to be, and she jumped up and ran to the
corner and cried out: "Pretty! Pretty! Pretty!"

One grown person took up the Thing that was blue, and green, and brown,
and soft, and waved it to and fro, to and fro in front of Bessie Bell.

And Bessie Bell clapped her hands, and jumped for joy, and laughed, and
cried: "Boo! boo! boo!"

And Bessie Bell ran right into the Thing that was blue, and green, and
brown, and soft, and she threw out her round little arms and clasped
them about the Thing that was blue, and green, and brown, and soft!

And she pulled it over her face, and she laughed and cried for
joy--because she remembered--

But the great grown person who had brought Bessie Bell to the pretty
house said: "Oh, Bessie Bell! Why, Bessie Bell!  For shame, Bessie
Bell!  How could you do so to the beautiful peacock-feather-fly-brush!"

So Bessie Bell could only cry--and that very softly--and feel ashamed
as she was bid, and forget what it was that she remembered.

Bessie Bell might have remembered one time when a great house was all
desolate, and when nobody or nothing at all breathed in the whole great
big house, but one little tiny girl and one great big white cat, with
just one black spot on its tail.

The nurse that always had played so nicely with the tiny little girl
was lying with her cheek in her hand over yonder.

The Grandmother who had always talked so much to the tiny little girl
was not talking any more.

The tiny little girl was so sick that she only just could breathe
quickly, just so--and just so--.

If Bessie Bell could remember that, it was only that she remembered the
big white cat like a big soft dream.  And she might have remembered
how, now and then, the big cat put out a paw and touched the little
girl's cheek, like a soft white dream-touch.

And that little girl had on a night-gown that was long, and soft, and
white, and on that little white night-gown was worked, oh so carefully,
in linen thread: "Bessie Bell."

Then the few people who walked about the world in Fever-time came in to
that big house, and they took up that little tiny girl that breathed so
softly and so quickly--just so!

And they read on her little white night-gown the words written with the
linen thread: "Bessie Bell."

And they said: "Let us take this little girl with us."

They put a big soft white blanket around the little girl and walked out
of the big house with her, someone carrying her in strong arms.

And the big white cat got down off the big white bed and rubbed himself
against the bedpost, and went round and round the bed-post, and rubbed
himself round and round the bed-post.

And the tiny little girl never saw the big house, or the big soft white
cat any more.

And now when it happened that she remembered something, great grown
people said: "No, no, Bessie Bell, there is nothing in the world like
that."

So she just wondered and remembered, and almost forgot what it was that
she did remember.

  * * *
  * *
  *


Sister Mary Felice had all the little tiny girls playing in the sand:
that was the place that was meant for the little girls to play in.

All the little girls had on blue checked aprons.  All the aprons had
straps and buttons behind.

For just one hour every day all the little tiny girls played in the
sand, and while they played Sister Mary Felice sat on a willow-wrought
bench and watched them play.

Then when that hour was exactly passed Sister Angela always came with a
basket of netted canes, an Indian basket, on her arm.  In the Indian
basket were little cakes--such nice little cakes--always they had
caraway seeds in them.

One day Sister Mary Felice said: "Sister Angela, did Sister Ignatius
put too many caraway seeds in the cakes this time?"

Sister Angela said: "I think not, Sister Mary Felice.  Will you try
one?"

Sister Mary Felice said: "I thank you, Sister Angela."

Then Sister Mary Felice took one to try.

Then always Sister Angela, with the Indian basket on her arm, took all
the little girls to the long back gallery that was latticed in.

On a low shelf close against the lattice sat a row of white basins.

Then all the little tiny girls washed their little tiny hands in the
white basins.  And while they washed their little tiny hands by twos
and by threes together, two little girls washing their hands in one
basin together, three little girls washing their hands together, they
all oftentimes laughed together and said:

  "Wash together!
  And be friends forever!
  Wash together!
  And be friends forever!"

Then Sister Angela held a long pink checked towel in her hands while
the little tiny girls came as their tiny hands were washed and wiped
them on the pink checked towel.

Then if two little girls took hold of the pink checked towel at once
they both laughed and sang:

  "Don't wipe together,
  Or we'll fight
  Before night."

And the other little girls that were still washing their hands in the
white basins on the low shelf by the back-gallery lattice sang over and
over again:

  "Wash together! We'll wash together!
  And we'll be happy forever!"

When all the pink clean tiny hands were wiped dry, or as nearly dry as
little girls do wipe tiny pink hands, on the pink checked towel held
for them by Sister Angela, then Sister Angela hung the pink checked
towel on the lowest limb of the arbor-vita tree.  Then the little girls
all ran to sit down in a row on the lowest step of the back gallery,
with their little feet on the gravel below.  Sister Angela walked the
length of the row, and gave to each little girl in the row a sweet tiny
cake, or maybe Sister Angela walked twice down the row and gave to each
little girl two cakes, or sometimes maybe she walked three times down
the row, and then each little girl had three cakes; but no one little
girl ever had more than every other little girl.

Always Sister Angela sat a little way off from the row of the little
girls.  She always sat on a bench under the great magnolia-tree and
watched the tiny girls as they ate their tiny cakes.

And always the pink checked towel waved itself ever so softly to and
fro on the lowest limb of the arbor-vitae-tree, for that was the way
that pink checked towels did to help to dry themselves after helping to
dry so many little pink fingers.  Often, so often, little brown
sparrows came hopping to the gravel to pick up any tiny crumbs of cake
that the little girls dropped, but you may be sure that they did not
drop so very many, many little brown crumbs for little brown birds to
find.

But if they were dropped, even if by rare chance were the crumbs so
large as to be nearly as large as half of a cake--why then, that crumb
had to stay for those little birds.  It was the law! The law that the
little girls had made for themselves, and nobody but themselves knew
about that law--for the good of the birds.  But no little girl cared to
disobey that law of their own that nobody but themselves knew about,
for if one had--how dreadful it would have been--no little girl would
have played with her until--oh, so long, so long--until she might at
last have been forgiven!

So all the little brown crumbs that the tiny little girls did drop, why
the tiny little brown birds did pick up,--and they never said whether
they liked caraway seeds or not!

  * * *
  * *
  *


One day when the tiny little girls were all in a row eating cakes,
Sister Angela, sitting on a bench under the magnolia, said quite
suddenly: "Good morning!"

She rose up from her seat under the great magnolia.

Then the little brown birds fluttered up from the gravel.

Then all the little girls looked up.

There stood two pretty grown-up people.

And these two grown-up people had no soft white around their faces like
the soft white around the face that Sister Angela wore, and they had no
black veils, soft and long like the black veil that Sister Angela wore.
And they had no little white crosses like the small white cross that
Sister Angela wore on the breast of her soft black dress.

One of the pretty-grown up folks looked at one of the little tiny girls
and said: "And what is her name?"

Sister Angela said: "Bessie Bell was written on her little white
night-gown, done in linen thread."

And Sister Angela said: "Yes, we have always kept the little white
night-gown."

And one of the pretty grown-up people said: "Yes, that was right.
Always to keep the little white night-gown."

And the other grown-up person said: "And how comes that to be all that
you know?"

Sister Angela said: "Because of the fever."

And the pretty one said: "The dreadful fever!"

Sister Angela said: "Yes.  The dreadful fever.  It often leaves none in
a house, and even sometimes none in a whole neighborhood to tell the
story."

If, as Sister Angela and the pretty grown person talked, there came to
Bessie Bell any thought of a great silent house, and a big white cat,
with just one bit of black spot on its tail, why if such a thought came
to Bessie Bell it came only to float away, away like white thistle
seed--drifting away as dreams drift.

When the two pretty grown ones had gone away, then Sister Angela had
nodded her head at the row of little girls, so that they might know
that they might go on eating their cakes, for of course the little
girls knew that they must hold their cakes in their hands and wait, and
not eat, when Sister Angela had shaken her head gently at them while
she talked to the two pretty ones.  The little brown birds seemed to
know, too, that they could come back to the gravel to look for crumbs
again.

Then, as the little girls were again eating their cakes, one little
girl said: "Sister Angela, were they Sisters?"

Sister Angela said: "No, they are not Sisters."

Then another little girl asked: "Sister Angela, what were they, then?"

Sister Angela said: "They are only just ladies."

Then always after that Bessie Bell and the other little girls were glad
when Only-Just-Ladies came to see them.

The sun shone nearly always, or it seemed to the little girls that it
nearly always shone, out in that large garden where they could play the
hour in the sand, and where they could spend one hour eating their
cakes with their feet on the gravel, and where they could walk behind
Sister Justina on all the shell-bordered walks around the beds (but
they must not step on the beds)--just one hour.  If a rain came it
always did surprise them: those little girls were always surprised when
it rained!  and they did not know exactly what to do when it rained,
though they knew almost always what to do when the sun shone.  One day
when it rained it happened that the little girls were all left over the
one hour in the long room where all the rows and rows of the little
arm-chairs sat, and where all the little girls learned to Count, and to
say Their Prayers, and to Tell the Time, and to sing "Angels Bright,"
and to know the A B C blocks.  Sister Theckla, who always stayed the
one hour in that room, had gone to say to the Sisters that the one hour
was over, and that it was raining, and what must the little girls do
now?

While Sister Theckla was gone, all the little girls went to the
windows, and all the tiny girls looked at the rain coming down, coming
down in drops, so many drops; and so fast the drops came that they
seemed to come in long strings of drops straight from the sky.

Then one little girl laughed and began to beat on the window by which
she stood, to beat all over it as far as her little damp pink fingers
could reach, and to say:

  "Rain! Rain!
  Go to Spain!
  Rain! Rain!
  Go to Spain!
  Rain! Rain!
  Go to Spain!"

And all the little girls thought that was so beautiful that they began
to beat all over the windows, too, just as high and just as far as
their little damp pink fingers could reach, and to sing as loud and as
gaily as they could sing:

  "Rain! Rain!
  Go to Spain!"

Sister Theckla and Sister Angela came to the door of the room,--and
they were so astonished that they could only look at one another and
say to one another: "What do they mean?  Where did they learn that?"

And the little girl who had taught the other little girls that much of
the song remembered some more; and so she beat louder than ever on the
window pane and said:

  "Rain, rain, rain,
  Go away!
  And come another day!"

All the little girls laughed more than ever and sang louder than ever:

  "Rain, rain, rain,
  Go away!
  Come again another day!"

Then Sister Angela looked at Sister Theckla and said: "Where did the
child learn that, do you suppose?"

And Sister Theckla said: "She is older than the others.  She must have
learned it at home!"

And Sister Angela and Sister Theckla came into the room and they said:
"See, now, what you have done to the windows!"

Sure enough, when the little girls looked at the windows the glass was
all dim and blurred with little damp finger-prints!

  * * *
  * *
  *


It was one day as the sun shone as it did shine most days, that the
same little girl who knew how to sing that song when it rained was
running on the shell-bordered walk, holding Bessie Bell's hand and
running, when her little foot tripped up against Bessie Bell's
foot,--and over Bessie Bell rolled on the walk with the shell border.

Then Bessie Bell cried and cried.

And Sister Mary Felice said: "Bessie Bell, where are you hurt?"

Bessie Bell did not know where she was hurt: she only knew that she was
so sorry to have been so happy to be running, and then to roll so
suddenly on the walk.

Then the little girl said: "She isn't hurt at all.  She is just crying."

Sister Mary Felice said: "But you threw her down.  You must tell her
you are sorry."

Then the little girl said: "But I didn't mean to throw her down."

"But," Sister Mary Felice said, "you did trip her up, and you must beg
her pardon."

Then Sister Theckla came to take all the little girls to the room where
so many chairs sat in so many rows, and she too said: "Yes, you must
beg her pardon."

Bessie Bell was listening so that she had almost stopped crying, but
now when Sister Story Felice and Sister Theckla both said to the little
girl, "Yes, you must beg pardon," then the little girl began to cry,
too.

Then Bessie Bell grew so sorry again, she hardly knew why, or for what,
that she began to cry again.

So then both Sisters said again: "Yes, you should beg pardon."

But the little girl still cried, and said, "But I didn't mean to trip
her."  Then she shook her head at Bessie Bell and said--because she
just had to say it:

  "I beg your pardon!
  Grant me grace!
  I hope the cat will scratch your face!"

Oh! Sister Mary Felice looked at Sister Theckla, and Sister Theckla
looked at Sister Mary Felice--and they both said: "Where did she learn
that?"

But Bessie Bell knew that the little girl did not mean to throw her
down, so she said, "No, you didn't mean to do it."

She had thought she ought to say that, and she had been getting ready
to say that before the little girl had been made to beg her pardon, and
now that she had gotten ready she said: "No, you didn't mean to do it."

Then the little girl stopped crying, too, and ran and caught Bessie
Bell's hand again and said to her again:

  "I beg your pardon!
  Grant me grace!
 I hope the cat won't scratch your face!"

So they went skipping down the walk together just as they had gone
before.  Then Sister Mary Felice and Sister Theckla both said: "Well!
Well!"

  * * *
  * *
  *


One time it came about that Bessie Bell lay a long time in her little
white crib-bed, and she did not know why, and she did not care much
why.  She did not get up and play in the sand while Sister Mary Felice
looked one hour at the little girls playing in the sand.

She scarcely wondered why she did not leave the crib-bed to sit on the
long gallery-step in a row with all the other little girls, all with
their feet on the gravel, and all eating the tiny cakes that Sister
Ignatius made, while Sister Angela sat on the bench under the
magnolia-tree and looked at the row of little girls.

If sometimes just at waking from fitful sleep in her crib-bed there
came to her just a thought, or a remembrance, of a great big soft white
cat that reached its paw out and softly touched her cheek, it came to
her only like the touch of fancy in a big soft white dream.

Often Only-Just-Ladies came and talked over her little white crib with
Sister Helen Vincula.

Bessie Bell's little fingers were no longer pink and round now; they
lay just white, so white and small, on the white spread.  And Bessie
Bell did not mind how quiet she was told to be, for she was too tired
to want to make any noise at all.

One day it happened that an Only-Just-Lady came and said: "Sister Helen
Vincula, I want to give you a ticket to carry you away to the high
mountain, and I want you to go to stay a month in my house on the
mountain, and I want you to carry this little sick girl with you.  And
when you are there, Sister Helen Vincula, my bread-man will bring you
bread, and my milk-man will bring you milk, and my market-man from the
cove will bring you apples and eggs, and all the rest of the good
things that come up the mountain from the warm caves."

"For," the Only-Just-Lady said, "I want this little sick girl to grow
well again, and I want her little arms and legs and fingers to get
round and pink again."

Bessie Bell thought that that was a very pretty tale that the Lady was
telling, but she did not know or understand that that tale was about
her.  Then the Only-Just-Lady said, "Sister Helen Vincula, it will do
you good, too, as well as this little girl to stay in the high
mountains."

Not until all of Bessie Bell's little blue checked aprons, and all of
her little blue dresses, and all of her little white petticoats, and
all of her little white night-gowns, and even the tiny old night-gown
with the linen thread name worked on it, had been put with all the rest
of her small belongings into the old trunk with brass tacks in the
leather, the old, old trunk that had belonged to Sister Helen Vincula,
did Bessie Bell know that it was herself, little Bessie Bell, who was
going away Somewhere.

  * * *
  * *
  *


It was a very strange new world to Bessie Bell, that new world up on
the High Mountain.

She did not think the grand views off the edge of the high mountain so
strange.  But she loved to look out on those views as she stood by
Sister Helen Vincula on the gray cliff; Sister Helen Vincula holding
her hand very fast while they both looked down into the valleys and
coves.  As the shadows of evening crept up to the cliff whereon they
stood, and as those shadows folded round and round the points and
coves, those points and caves lying below and beyond fold over fold,
everything grew purple and violet.

Everything grew so purple, and so violet, and so great, and so wide
that it seemed sometimes to the little girl, standing on the cliff by
Sister Helen Vincula, that she was looking right down into the heart of
a violet as great, as wide--as great, as wide--as the whole world.

But this did not seem so strange to Bessie Bell, for she yet remembered
that window out of which one could see just small, green, moving
things, and of which great grown people had told her, "No, Bessie Bell,
there is no such window in all the world."

So in her own way she thought that maybe after awhile that the big, big
violet might drift away, away, and great grown people might say, "No,
Bessie Bell, there never was a violet in all the world like that."

It was the people--and all the people--of that new world that seemed so
strange to Bessie Bell.

There were children, and children in all the summer cabins on that high
mountain.

And those children did not walk in rows.

And those children did not do things by one hours.

And those children did not wash their hands in little white basins
sitting in rows on long back gallery benches.

It was strange to Bessie Bell that those children did not sit in rows
to eat tiny cakes with caraway seeds in them while Sister Angela sat on
the bench under the great magnolia-tree and looked at the row of little
girls.

It was so very strange to Bessie Bell that these children wore all
sorts of clothes--all sorts! Not just blue dresses, and blue checked
aprons.

And Bessie Bell knew, too, that those little girls in all sorts of
clothes could not float away into that strange country of No-where and
Never-was, where, too, the things that she remembered seemed to drift
away--and to so nearly get lost, living only in dimming memory.

These little girls in all sorts of clothes were real, and sure-enough,
and nobody could ever say of them, "There are no such little girls in
the world," because sometimes when Bessie Bell would get to thinking,
and thinking about the strangeness of them, she would almost wonder if
she did not just remember them.  When she would give one just a little
pinch to see if that one was a real sure-enough little girl, why that
little girl would say, "Don't." She would say "Don't!" just the same as
a little girl in the row of little girls all with blue checked aprons
would say "Don't," if you pinched one of them ever so little.

There were no Sisters on that high mountain.  Sister Helen Vincula was
the only Sister there.  That seemed very strange to Bessie Bell.

One day the strangest thing of all so far happened.

One little girl called another little girl with whom she was playing,
"Sister."

Bessie Bell laughed at that.

"Oh, she is not a Sister!" said Bessie Bell.

"Yes, she is; she is my sister!" said the little girl.

"No," said Bessie Bell, just as great grown people said to her when she
remembered strange things, "No, there never was in the world a Sister
like that!"

Then the smaller of the little girls who were playing together ran to
the larger one, and caught hold of her hand, and they stood together in
front of Bessie Bell--they both had long black curls, but Bessie Bell
had short golden curls--and the smaller girl said: "Yes, she is my
sister!"

And the larger girl said: "Yes, she is, too.  She is
my-own-dear-sister!"

The smaller little girl shook her black curls and said: "She is my
own-dear-owny-downy-dear-sister!"

In all of her life Bessie Bell had never heard anything like that.

And all the other little girls who were playing joined in and said:
"Bessie Bell doesn't know what she is talking about.  Of course you are
sisters.  Everybody knows you are sisters!"

Bessie Bell was distressed to be told that she did not know what she
was talking about--and she knew so much about Sisters.

So she began to cry, very softly.

Then she stopped crying long enough to say: "But I never saw Sisters
like that before!"

Then she took up her crying again right where she left off.

Then a little boy--but he seemed a very large boy to Bessie Bell with
his long-striped-stocking-legs--said to Bessie Bell: "No, Bessie Bell,
they are not Sisters like Sister Helen Vincula and the Sisters that you
know, but they are just what they say they are--just own dear sisters."

Then came to Bessie Bell that knowledge that we are often times slow in
getting: she knew all of a sudden--that she did not know everything.
She did not know all, even about Sisters.

Because, in all that she knew or remembered or wondered about, there
was nothing at all about that strange thing that all the little
children, but herself, knew so well about--"Own-dear-sisters."

Another strange thing came into her mind, brought into her mind partly
by her ears, but mostly by her eyes: There were not in this new world
on the high mountain--perhaps there were not after all so many anywhere
as she had thought--there were not so many Sisters like Sister Helen
Vincula (for was not Sister Helen Vincula the only Sister she had seen
on the mountain?).  There were not after all so many Sisters like
Sister Angela; and Sister Mary Felice, who watched the little
blue-checked-apron girls playing in the sand; and Sister Ignatius, who
cooked the cakes with the caraway seeds in them; and Sister Theckla,
who taught the little girls to Count and to Sing.

Why, the whole world, surely the up-on-the mountain-world, seemed full
of Only-Just-Ladies.

Not just a Lady here and there, coming to visit with hats on, to talk a
little to the Sisters, to look at the little girls with blue checked
aprons on.  But here they were coming and going all the time, moving
about, and living in the cabins, walking everywhere with or without
hats on, standing on the gray cliffs, and looking down--maybe into the
heart of a worldwide violet there, off the edge of the cliff, such as
Bessie Bell saw or fancied she saw.

So many Ladies.

Bessie Bell leaned against the little fluted post of the gallery to the
cabin that she and Sister Helen Vincula lived in, and decided to
herself that, strange as it was, yet was it true that the whole world
was full of--Ladies.

There were yet stranger things for Bessie Bell to learn.

She had not for long played with those many little girls in all sorts
of clothes, and with larger girls, and with boys,--some with
short-striped-stocking-legs and some with
long-striped-stocking-legs,--before she heard one child say: "Mama says
she will take me to Sweet Fern Cave to-morrow."

Or perhaps it was another child who said: "Mama won't let me wade in
the branch."

Or another child said: "Mama says I can have a party for all the little
girls and boys on the mountain next Friday!"

Then another little child said: "My Mama has made me a beautiful pink
dress, and I will wear that to your party."

Mama?  My Mama?

Bessie Bell leaned against the little fluted post of the gallery to the
cabin where she and Sister Helen Vincula lived, and thought a great
deal about that.

And Bessie Bell wondered a great deal what that could mean: Mama?  My
Mama?

There were strange new things in this world.

Bessie Bell almost forgot to remember now, because every day was so
full of such strange new things to know.

Mama?  My Mama?

Bessie Bell did a great deal of thinking about that.

One day the little children were playing at building rock chimneys.

There was not much sand there for little children to play in, so that
the children often built rock chimneys, and rock tables, and rock
fences.

As they were playing one little girl suddenly left the playground and
ran, calling: "Mama! Mama! Come here; come this way, and see the
chimney we have built!"

Bessie Bell turned quickly from play and looked after the little girl
who was running across the playground to where three ladies were
standing.

The little girl caught the dress of one of the ladies, and came pulling
at her dress and bringing her across the ground to see the stone
chimney, and the little girl kept saying:

"Look, Mama! See, Mama! Isn't it a grand chimney? Won't it 'most hold
smoke?"

Bessie Bell stood still with her little hands--they were beginning to
be round pink little hands again, now--clasped in front of her and
wondered.

"See, Mama! Look, Mama!" cried the little girl.

"Why does she say: Mama?" asked Bessie Bell, because she just wondered,
and wondered--and she did not know.

"Because it is her Mama," said a child who had just brought two more
rocks to put on the chimney.

"Oh," said Bessie Bell.

That lady who was the little girl's Mama looked much as all the ladies
looked.

"Are all Ladies Mamas?" asked Bessie Bell.

She hoped the child who had brought the two rocks would not laugh, for
Bessie Bell knew she would cry if she did.

The little girl did not laugh at all.  She was trying so carefully to
put the last rock on top of the stone chimney, she said: "No, Bessie
Bell: some are Mamas, and some are only just Ladies."

There.  There it was again: Only-Just-Ladies.

Bessie Bell wondered how to tell which were Mamas, and which were
Ladies--just Ladies.

Very often after that day she watched those who passed the cabin where
she and Sister Helen Vincula lived, and wondered which were Mamas--

And which were Ladies.

There was no rule of old or young by which Bessie Bell could tell.

Nor was it as one could tell Sisters from Just-Ladies by a way of
dress.  For Sisters, like Sister Helen Vincula, wore a soft white
around the face, and soft long black veils, and a small cross on the
breast of the dress: so that even had any not known the difference one
could easily have guessed.

But for Ladies and Mamas there were none of these differences.

But Bessie Bell looked and looked and wondered, but her eyes brought to
her no way of knowing.

Bessie Bell could at length think of only one way to find out the
difference, and that was to ask--to let her ears help her eyes to bring
to her some way of knowing.

One day, a dear old lady with white curls all around under her bonnet
stopped near the playground and called Bessie Bell to her and gave her
some chocolate candy, every piece of candy folded up in its own white
paper.

Bessie Bell said: "Thank you, ma'am."

Then as the lady still stood by the playground Bessie Bell asked her:
"Are you a Lady, ma'am?"

"I have been called so," said the lady, smiling down at Bessie Bell.

"Or are you a Mama?" asked Bessie Bell.

"Ah," said the lady; "I am a Mama, too, but all my little girls have
grown up and left me."

Bessie Bell wondered how they could have done that, those little girls.
But she saw, and was so glad to see, that this lady was very wise, and
that she understood all the things that little girls wonder about.

But though there was a difference, a very great difference, between
Mamas and Ladies it was very hard to tell--unless you asked.

One day a large fat lady took Bessie Bell on her lap.  That was very
strange to Bessie Bell--to sit on top of anybody.

And the lady made a rabbit, and a pony, and a preacher, all out of a
handkerchief and her nice fat fingers.  And then she made with the same
handkerchief and fingers a Mama holding a Baby.

Then Bessie Bell looked up at her with her wondering eyes and asked:
"Are you a Lady--"

"Bless my soul!" cried the lady. "Do you hear this child?  And now,
come to think of it, I don't know whether I am a lady or not--"

And the lady laughed until Bessie Bell felt quite shaken up.

"Or are you a Mama?" asked Bessie Bell, when it seemed that the lady
was about to stop laughing.

"So that is it?" asked the lady, and she seemed about to begin laughing
again.

"Yes, I am a Mama, and I have three little girls about as funny as you
are."

Another time a lady passed by the cabin where Bessie Bell stood leaning
against the little fluted white post of the gallery, and said:

"Good morning, Bessie Bell.  I am Alice's Mama."

That made things so simple, thought Bessie Bell.  This lady was a Mama.
And she was Alice's Mama.

Bessie Bell wished that all would tell in that nice way at once whether
they were Mamas or Just-Ladies.

The next lady who passed by the cabin also stopped to talk to Bessie
Bell.

And Bessie Bell asked: "Are you a Mama or Only-Just-A-Lady?"

"I am only just a lady," the lady said, patting Bessie Bell's little
tiny hand.  And it was easy to see that, in Bessie Bell's mind, though
Only-Just-Ladies were kind and sweet, Mamas were far greater and more
important beings.

One night, when Sister Helen Vincula had put Bessie Bell to bed in the
small bed that was not a crib-bed, though like that she had slept in
before she had come to the high mountain, Bessie Bell still lay wide
awake.

Her blue eyes were wide open and both of her pink little hands were
above her head on the pillow.  She was thinking, and thinking, and she
forgot that she was thinking her thinking aloud, and she said:

"Alice has a mama.  Robbie has a mama.  Katie has a mama.  Where is
Bessie Bell's mama?  Never mind: Bessie Bell will find a mama."

Then Sister Helen Vincula, who was wide awake, too, said:

"Ah me, ah me."

Bessie Bell said: "Sister Helen Vincula, did you call me?"

Sister Helen Vincula said:

"No, child: go to sleep."

  * * *
  * *
  *


The next day was the day for Sister Helen Vincula and Bessie Bell to
leave the high, cool mountain.  They were to leave the little cabin
where the lady had told them to live until they had gotten well again.

So when their leaving day came Sister Helen Vincula put a clean
stiff-starched blue-checked apron on Bessie Bell, and they walked
together to the Mall where the band was playing.

Bessie Bell was always so glad when Sister Helen Vincula took her to
the Mall in the afternoon when the band played.

All the little children went every afternoon in their prettiest dresses
to the Mall where the band played.

Because in the afternoon the band played just the sort of music that
little girls liked to hear.

Every afternoon all the nurses came to the Mall and brought all the
babies, and the nurses rolled the babies up and down the sawdust walks
in the pretty baby-carriages, with nice white, and pink, and blue
parasols over the babies' heads.

That afternoon Sister Helen Vincula stayed a long time with Bessie
Bell, on the Mall, sitting by her on the stone bench and listening to
the gay music, and looking at the children in their prettiest clothes,
and at the nurses rolling the babies in the pretty carriages with the
beautiful pink, and white, and blue parasols over the babies' heads.

Then Sister Helen Vincula said: "Bessie Bell, I am going across the
long bridge to see some ladies and to tell them Good-bye, because we
are going away tomorrow."

And Sister Helen Vincula said: "Now, will you stay right here on this
stone bench till I come back for you?"

Bessie Bell said, "Yes, Sister Helen Vincula."

So Sister Helen Vincula went away across the long bridge to see the
ladies and to tell them Good-bye.

Bessie Bell did not know much about going away, and she did not
understand about it at all, so she did not care at all about it.

She just sat on the stone bench with her little pink hands folded on
her blue checked apron, and looked at the children in their prettiest
clothes, and at the babies, and at the parasols.

She loved so to look, and she loved so to listen to the pretty gay
music that she did not notice that a lady had come to the stone bench,
and had seated herself just where Sister Helen Vincula had sat before
she went to see the ladies and to tell them Good-bye.

There were many other ladies on the Mall, and many ladies passed in
their walk by the stone bench where Bessie Bell and the lady sat.

Everybody loved to come to the Mall in the afternoon when the band
played. Everybody loved to hear the gay music.  Everybody loved to see
the children in their prettiest clothes, and to see all the nurses
rolling the babies in the carriages with the pretty parasols.

And one of the ladies passing by looked over to the stone bench where
Bessie Bell sat with her hands folded on her blue checked apron, and
where the lady had seated herself just as Sister Helen Vincula had sat
before she went across the long bridge.

And the lady said, as she passed by and looked: "Striking likeness."

Another lady with her said: "Wonderful!"

And another one with them said: "Impossible! But strange indeed--"

Bessie Bell did not notice what the ladies said, but because they
looked so attentively to where she sat on the stone bench her attention
was turned the way their eyes turned as they talked in low tones and
looked attentively passing by.

So when they had passed by, Bessie Bell turned and looked to the other
end of the bench where the lady sat.

Bessie Bell was so surprised at the first look that she hardly knew
what to think.

The lady did not look like Sister Helen Vincula, oh, not at all; but
the veil that she wore was soft and black like that that Sister Helen
Vincula wore.  The dress that the lady wore was black also, but it
looked as if it were stiff and very crisp, and not soft like the dress
that Sister Helen Vincula wore.  Bessie Bell did not mean to be rude,
but she reached out one tiny hand and took hold of the lady's dress,
just a tiny pinch of it.

Yes, it was very crisp.

Then the lady turned and looked at Bessie Bell.

Then Bessie Bell was still more surprised, for there was something
white under her veil.  Not white all round the face like that Sister
Helen Vincula wore, but soft crinkly white just over the lady's soft
yellow hair.

Also on the breast of her black dress was a cross, but not white like
the cross that Sister Helen Vincula wore.  No, this cross was shining
very brightly, and it was very golden in the sunlight,--and--somehow,
somehow,--Bessie Bell knew just how that cross felt,--she knew without
feeling it.  She did not have to feel it as she had felt the dress.

Bessie Bell looked and thought.  She thought this lady looked like a
Sister--and yet there was a difference.  She looked also like
Just-A-Lady, and she also looked grand and important enough for a Mama.

Bessie Bell looked and thought, but she could not tell just exactly
what this lady was.

It was best that she should ask, and then she would surely know.

So she asked: "Are you a Lady, ma'am?"

"I hope so, little girl," the lady said.

"I thought, maybe, you were a Sister," said Bessie Bell.

"No," said the lady.

"Like Sister Mary Felice, and Sister Angela, and Sister Helen Vincula,"
said Bessie Bell.

"No," said the lady.

"Are you a Mama, then?" asked Bessie Bell.

The lady looked as if she were going to cry.

But Bessie Bell could see nothing to cry about.  The band was still
playing ever so gaily, and all the little children looked so beautiful
and so happy, all playing and running hither and thither on the sawdust
walks, that it was good just to look at them.

But on the instant Bessie Bell remembered how sorrowful it was to cry
when you could not understand things, so she quickly reached out her
little pink hand and laid it on the lady's hand--just because she knew
how sorrowful it felt to feel like crying and not to know.

"You see," said Bessie Bell gently, as she softly patted the lady's
hand, "you see, you do look something like a Sister,--but," said Bessie
Bell, "I believe you do look more like a Mama."

"Little girl," said the lady, "what do you mean?"

And she still looked as if she might cry.

"Yes," said Bessie Bell, for she had begun to think very hard, "Alice
has a mama.  Robbie has a mama.  Lucy has a mama.  Everybody has a
mama.  Never mind, Bessie Bell will find a mama--"

"Little girl," said the lady, "why do you say, Bessie Bell--?"

When the lady said that it seemed to Bessie Bell that she heard
something sweet--something away off beyond what the band was playing,
so she just clapped her hands and laughed out loud, and said over and
over as if it were a little song:

"Bessie Bell! Bessie, Bessie, Bessie Bell!"

But the lady at her side looked down at the child as if she were
afraid.  Bessie Bell knew how sorrowful it was to be afraid, so she
stopped patting her hands and laughing,--for she didn't know why she
had begun to do it--and she laid her hand again on the lady's hand,
just because she knew how sorrowful it was to be afraid.

But Bessie Bell could not see anything to be afraid of: the band was
playing just as gaily as ever, and the children, and the nurses, and
the babies, and the parasols were as gay as ever.

"Where is your mama?" asked the lady, taking fast hold of the little
hand that patted her hand.

"Everybody has a mama--never mind--"

"But where is your mama?" asked the lady again.

Bessie Bell had begun to wonder and so had forgotten to answer.

"Child, where is your mama?" said the lady again, still holding fast to
Bessie Bell's hand.

"But--I don't know," said Bessie Bell.

Then the lady looked as if she had begun to wonder, too, and she seemed
to be looking away off; away off, but how closely she held Bessie
Bell's hand--closer than Sister Angela, or Sister Theckla, or even
Sister Helen Vincula, or Sister Justina--

Then Bessie Bell began to wonder still more, and to remember, as the
lady held fast to her little fingers.  She began to talk her thinking
out loud, and she said: "Yes, there was a window--where everything was
green, and, small, and moving--but Sister Justina said there was not
any window like that in the whole world--"

The lady held Bessie Bell's hand very hard, and she said--softly, as if
she, too, was talking her thinking aloud:

"Yes, there was a window like that in the world, for just outside the
nursery-window there grew a Pride of China Tree, and it filled all the
window with small, green, moving leaves--"

Then Bessie Bell just let the lady draw her up close, and she leaned up
against the lady.

She felt so happy now, for she knew she had found the Wisest Woman in
the world, for this lady knew the things that little girls only could
remember.  If she had thought about it she would have told the lady
about the tiny apple-trees with the very, very small apples on them,
and other rows of apple-trees over those, and other rows on top of
those, and on top of all a row of big round red apples.

Then the lady might have said: Yes, there were apple-trees like that in
the world, for all the nursery walls were papered like that, with a row
of big round red apples at the top.

But Bessie Bell did not think of or remember that then; she just leaned
up against the lady and swung one of her little feet up and down, back
and forth, as she sat on the stone bench: she was so happy to have met
the Wisest Woman in the world.

The people who passed by looked, and turned to look again, at the
little girl in the stiff-starched, faded blue checked apron leaning up
against the lady in the crisp, dull silk.

But Bessie Bell did not look at anybody who passed.

And the lady did not look at anybody who passed.

And the band kept on playing gay music.

It was not very long before Sister Helen Vincula came back from seeing
the ladies across the long bridge, and from telling them Good-bye.  As
soon as she saw Bessie Bell leaning up against the lady she cried:

"Why, Bessie Bell!"

Bessie Bell said, "Sister Helen Vincula," and she knew she had done
something wrong, but she could only wonder what.

But the lady said very quickly,--and she held Bessie Bell's hand even
harder than before,--she said:

"Sister Helen Vincula, I must ask you something--"

Sister Helen Vincula and the lady talked a long time.

Bessie Bell did not listen very much to what they said.

She did not lean up against the lady now, but she sat close.  Sister
Helen Vincula did not seem to mind that.

She did not swing her foot to and fro now, but she still felt very
contented and happy to have met the very Wisest Woman.

When she did listen a little she heard the lady say:

"There came news that my husband was ill in Mobile, and I feared that
it was of the Dreadful Fever, and I hurried there so that I could get
to him before the Dreadful Quarantines were put on.  I felt all safe
about the baby, for I left her with my mother and the faithful nurse
who had been my nurse, too.  But when the worst had come and was
over,--and it was the Dreadful Fever,--then I tried to get back to my
home; but I could not for many, many days, because the Dreadful
Quarantines were on.  Then at last I did get there--I slipped up
secretly by water.  All were gone. I could find no one who could tell
me anything.  I could find no one who knew anything.  The house was
wide open.  There was no sign of life, but that the cat came and rubbed
up against me, and walked round and round me.  The Dreadful Fever was
everywhere, and nobody could tell me anything; and I searched
everywhere, always and always alone--there was no one to help me:
everyone was trying to save from the Dreadful Fever--"

Bessie Bell did not know what all that was about, but she felt so sorry
for the lady that she squeezed down ever so softly on her hand that
held her own still so tightly.

Sister Helen Vincula wiped her eyes.

The lady kept looking away off, but still held Bessie Bell's hand in
hers.

Then Sister Helen Vincula said: "We are going away to-morrow."

But the lady held fast to Bessie Bell's hand and said: "Not this little
girl."

"Oh," said Sister Helen Vincula, "but she is in my charge, and so what
can I do!"

And the lady said: "I cannot let her leave me--not ever."

But Sister Helen Vincula said: "Oh, madam, you do not know.  No matter
what we hope, we do not know--"

But the lady held still faster to Bessie Bell's hand.

"Oh," said Sister Helen Vincula, "I have a thought! Come to our cabin
with me."

So they went.

And Bessie Bell walked between Sister Helen Vincula and the lady.

And they each held one of her little pink hands.

When they were at the cabin Sister Helen Vincula opened the old trunk
with the brass tacks on it, and she went down to the very bottom of it,
unpacking as she went.  For the old trunk was almost entirely packed
for the going away to-morrow.  Then Sister Helen Vincula took out, from
almost the bottom of the trunk, the little white night-gown that had
"Bessie Bell" written on it with linen thread.

And Sister Helen Vincula laid the little white night-gown across the
lady's lap.

Then the lady read the name written with the linen thread.

The lady said: "I worked this name with my own hands."

She drew Bessie Bell closer to her, and she said: "Sister Helen
Vincula, can you doubt?"

Bessie Bell stood contentedly where the lady held her, and she looked
first at the night-gown and then at the lady, then at Sister Helen
Vincula.  She did not know or care what it was all about--she scarcely
wondered.

"Sister Helen Vincula," said the lady, "I know past all doubting that I
worked this name.  You believe that.  Much more past all doubting do
you not know--You must know--"

"Ah," said Sister Helen Vincula, "I hope with you." She reached for the
little night-gown, and she smoothed it in her fingers.  "Ah," she said,
"the child has grown since she has been with us, so much, but the
little gown--it looks--really smaller to me--"

But the lady was not listening to Sister Helen Vincula.  She had her
arms about Bessie Bell's shoulders and was looking into her face.

"I am glad I brought the little gown," Sister Helen Vincula was saying;
"the child was so ill, so fearfully thin, I feared--it was only a
fancy--I feared--"

"No, no, no," cried the lady, drawing Bessie Bell closer.

"Now nearly two years she has been with us," said Sister Helen Vincula.

"She was just old enough to be put to the table in a high chair," said
the lady.  "Ah, how she did laugh and crow and jump when her father
took the peacock-feather-fly-brush from the maid, and waved it in front
of her!  She would seize the ends of the feathers, and laugh and crow
louder than ever, and hide her laughing little face deep into the
feathers--Ah me--"

But Bessie Bell said nothing, nor remembered anything.  For she did not
know that the lady was talking of something green, and blue, and soft,
and brown.

And it was Sister Justina, and not Sister Helen Vincula, who had told
her to be ashamed when she had cried: Pretty! Pretty! Pretty!  as the
something green, and blue, and soft, and brown was waved to and fro in
front of her until she seized it and buried her little face in it for
the joy--of remembering--

So Sister Helen Vincula did not know, and Bessie Bell did not remember,
while the lady talked.

Only long after, when Bessie Bell grew much larger, it happened that
whenever she saw an old-fashioned peacock-feather-fly-brush--at first,
just for a second, she felt very glad; and then, just for a second, she
felt very sorry; and she never knew or could remember why.  She forgot
after awhile how she had been so full of sorrow when Sister Justina
said, Be Ashamed, and she could no longer remember why she was glad;
only a feeling of both was left--and she could not tell how or why.

But the lady would not let Bessie Bell get far from her, and Bessie did
not care to go far from her.  She stood with her little pink hands
folded, and looked up at the lady who held to her so closely.

Sister Helen Vincula said: "It was Sister Theckla who spent that summer
with the sick, and it was Sister Theckla who brought the child to us.
Can you not go home with us?  Or I could write to you at once--"

"No," said the lady. "I will go.  The child shall not leave me--'

"And we will talk to Sister Theckla, and she will tell us all that she
knows, and then--God willing--we shall know all."

The lady said: "Yes, we will all go together.  We will go at once."

And so it was that when Sister Theckla had told all that she knew, then
the lady knew (as she always had said she had known), past all
doubting, that Bessie Bell had really found what she most wished for.

But we do not know how long it was before Bessie Bell really understood
that the Wisest Woman in the world, who knew what little girls had
almost forgotten how to remember, was her own Mother.

  * * *
  * *
  *

When all the people on the high, cool mountains heard about all that
the lady knew, and all that Sister Theckla told, and all that Bessie
Bell had found, they were all as glad as they could be.

And when the boy with the long-striped-stocking-legs heard all about it
he said: "That is fine!  Bessie Bell said that she would find a
Mama--and she has!"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Somebody's Little Girl, by Martha Young

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOMEBODY'S LITTLE GIRL ***

***** This file should be named 702.txt or 702.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/0/702/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
