The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yates Pride, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Yates Pride

Author: Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

Posting Date: August 10, 2008 [EBook #978]
Release Date: July, 1997

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YATES PRIDE ***




Produced by Judith Boss





THE YATES PRIDE

A ROMANCE

By Mary E. Wilkins Freeman




PART I


Opposite Miss Eudora Yates's old colonial mansion was the perky modern
Queen Anne residence of Mrs. Joseph Glynn. Mrs. Glynn had a daughter,
Ethel, and an unmarried sister, Miss Julia Esterbrook. All three were
fond of talking, and had many callers who liked to hear the feebly
effervescent news of Wellwood. This afternoon three ladies were there:
Miss Abby Simson, Mrs. John Bates, and Mrs. Edward Lee. They sat in the
Glynn sitting-room, which shrilled with treble voices as if a flock of
sparrows had settled therein.

The Glynn sitting-room was charming, mainly because of the quantity
of flowering plants. Every window was filled with them, until the room
seemed like a conservatory. Ivy, too, climbed over the pictures, and the
mantel-shelf was a cascade of wandering Jew, growing in old china vases.

"Your plants are really wonderful, Mrs. Glynn," said Mrs. Bates, "but I
don't see how you manage to get a glimpse of anything outside the house,
your windows are so full of them."

"Maybe she can see and not be seen," said Abby Simson, who had a quick
wit and a ready tongue.

Mrs. Joseph Glynn flushed a little. "I have not the slightest curiosity
about my neighbors," she said, "but it is impossible to live just across
the road from any house without knowing something of what is going on,
whether one looks or not," said she, with dignity.

"Ma and I never look out of the windows from curiosity," said Ethel
Glynn, with spirit. Ethel Glynn had a great deal of spirit, which was
evinced in her personal appearance as well as her tongue. She had an
eye to the fashions; her sleeves were never out of date, nor was the
arrangement of her hair.

"For instance," said Ethel, "we never look at the house opposite because
we are at all prying, but we do know that that old maid has been doing a
mighty queer thing lately."

"First thing you know you will be an old maid yourself, and then your
stones will break your own glass house," said Abby Simson.

"Oh, I don't care," retorted Ethel. "Nowadays an old maid isn't an old
maid except from choice, and everybody knows it. But it must have been
different in Miss Eudora's time. Why, she is older than you are, Miss
Abby."

"Just five years," replied Abby, unruffled, "and she had chances, and I
know it."

"Why didn't she take them, then?"

"Maybe," said Abby, "girls had choice then as much as now, but I never
could make out why she didn't marry Harry Lawton."

Ethel gave her head a toss. "Maybe," said she, "once in a while, even so
long ago, a girl wasn't so crazy to get married as folks thought. Maybe
she didn't want him."

"She did want him," said Abby. "A girl doesn't get so pale and
peaked-looking for nothing as Eudora Yates did, after she had dismissed
Harry Lawton and he had gone away, nor haunt the post-office as she used
to, and, when she didn't get a letter, go away looking as if she would
die."

"Maybe," said Ethel, "her folks were opposed."

"Nobody ever opposed Eudora Yates except her own self," replied Abby.
"Her father was dead, and Eudora's ma thought the sun rose and set
in her. She would never have opposed her if she had wanted to marry a
foreign duke or the old Harry himself."

"I remember it perfectly," said Mrs. Joseph Glynn.

"So do I," said Julia Esterbrook.

"Don't see why you shouldn't. You were plenty old enough to have your
memory in good working order if it was ever going to be," said Abby
Simson.

"Well," said Ethel, "it is the funniest thing I ever heard of. If a girl
wanted a man enough to go all to pieces over him, and he wanted her, why
on earth didn't she take him?"

"Maybe they quarreled," ventured Mrs. Edward Lee, who was a mild,
sickly-looking woman and seldom expressed an opinion.

"Well, that might have been," agreed Abby, "although Eudora always had
the name of having a beautiful disposition."

"I have always found," said Mrs. Joseph Glynn, with an air of wisdom,
"that it is the beautiful dispositions which are the most set the minute
they get a start the wrong way. It is the always-flying-out people who
are the easiest to get on with in the long run."

"Well," said Abby, "maybe that is so, but folks might get worn all to a
frazzle by the flying-out ones before the long run. I'd rather take my
chances with a woman like Eudora. She always seems just so, just as calm
and sweet. When the Ames's barn, that was next to hers, burned down and
the wind was her way, she just walked in and out of her house, carrying
the things she valued most, and she looked like a picture--somehow she
had got all dressed fit to make calls--and there wasn't a muscle of her
face that seemed to move. Eudora Yates is to my mind the most beautiful
woman in this town, old or young, I don't care who she is."

"I suppose," said Julia Esterbrook, "that she has a lot of money."

"I wonder if she has," said Mrs. John Bates.

The others stared at her. "What makes you think she hasn't?" Mrs. Glynn
inquired, sharply.

"Nothing," said Mrs. Bates, and closed her thin lips. She would say no
more, but the others had suspicions, because her husband, John Bates,
was a wealthy business man.

"I can't believe she has lost her money," said Mrs. Glynn. "She wouldn't
have been such a fool as to do what she has if she hadn't money."

"What has she done?" asked Mrs. Bates, eagerly.

"What has she done?" asked Abby, and Mrs. Lee looked up inquiringly.

The faces of Mrs. Glynn, her daughter, and her sister became important,
full of sly and triumphant knowledge.

"Haven't you heard?" asked Mrs. Glynn.

"Yes, haven't you?" asked Ethel.

"Haven't any of you heard?" asked Julia Esterbrook.

"No," admitted Abby, rather feebly. "I don't know as I have."

"Do you mean about Eudora's going so often to the Lancaster girls' to
tea?" asked Mrs. John Bates, with a slight bridle of possible knowledge.

"I heard of that," said Mrs. Lee, not to be outdone.

"Land, no," replied Mrs. Glynn. "Didn't she always go there? It isn't
that. It is the most unheard-of thing she had done; but no woman, unless
she had plenty of money to bring it up, would have done it."

"To bring what up?" asked Abby, sharply. Her eyes looked as small and
bright as needles.

Julia regarded her with intense satisfaction. "What do women generally
bring up?" said she.

"I don't know of anything they bring up, whether they have it or not,
except a baby," retorted Abby, sharply.

Julia wilted a little; but her sister, Mrs. Glynn, was not perturbed.
She launched her thunderbolt of news at once, aware that the critical
moment had come, when the quarry of suspicion had left the bushes.

"She has adopted a baby," said she, and paused like a woman who had
fired a gun, half scared herself and shrinking from the report.

Ethel seconded her mother. "Yes," said she, "Miss Eudora has adopted a
baby, and she has a baby-carriage, and she wheels it out any time she
takes a notion." Ethel's speech was of the nature of an after-climax.
The baby-carriage weakened the situation.

The other women seized upon the idea of the carriage to cover their
surprise and prevent too much gloating on the part of Mrs. Glynn, Ethel,
and Julia.

"Is it a new carriage?" inquired Mrs. Lee.

"No, it looks like one that came over in the ark," retorted Mrs. Glynn.
Then she repeated: "She has adopted a baby," but this time there was no
effect of an explosion. However, the treble chorus rose high, "Where did
she get the baby? Was it a boy or a girl? Why did she adopt it? Did it
cry much?" and other queries, none of which Mrs. Glynn, Ethel, and Julia
could answer very decidedly except the last. They all announced that the
adopted baby was never heard to cry at all.

"Must be a very good child," said Abby.

"Must be a very healthy child," said Mrs. Lee, who had had experience
with crying babies.

"Well, she has it, anyhow," said Mrs. Glynn.

Right upon the announcement came proof. The beautiful door of the old
colonial mansion opposite was thrown open, and clumsy and cautious
motion was evident. Presently a tall, slender woman came down the path
between the box borders, pushing a baby-carriage. It was undoubtedly a
very old carriage. It must have dated back to the fifties, if not
the forties. It was made of wood, with a leather buggy-top, and was
evidently very heavy.

Abby eyed it shrewdly. "If I am not mistaken," said she, "that is the
very carriage Eudora herself was wheeled around in when she was a baby.
I am almost sure I have seen that identical carriage before. When we
were girls I used to go to the Yates house sometimes. Of course, it was
always very formal, a little tea-party for Eudora, with her mother on
hand, but I feel sure that I saw that carriage there one of those times.

"I suppose it cost a lot of money, in the time of it. The Yateses always
got the very best for Eudora," said Julia. "And maybe Eudora goes about
so little she doesn't realize how out of date the carriage is, but I
should think it would be very heavy to wheel, especially if the baby is
a good-sized one."

"It looks like a very large baby," said Ethel. "Of course, it is so
rolled up we can't tell."

"Haven't you gone out and asked to see the baby?" said Abby.

"Would we dare unless Eudora Yates offered to show it?" said Julia, with
a surprised air; and the others nodded assent. Then they all crowded to
the front windows and watched from behind the screens of green flowering
things. It was very early in the spring. Fairly hot days alternated with
light frosts. The trees were touched with sprays of rose and gold and
gold-green, but the wind still blew cold from the northern snows, and
the occupant of Eudora's ancient carriage was presumably wrapped well
to shelter it from harm. There was, in fact, nothing to be seen in the
carriage, except a large roll of blue and white, as Eudora emerged from
the yard and closed the iron gate of the tall fence behind her.

Through this fence pricked the evergreen box, and the deep yard was full
of soft pastel tints of reluctantly budding trees and bushes. There was
one deep splash of color from a yellow bush in full bloom.

Eudora paced down the sidewalk with a magnificent, stately gait. There
was something rather magnificent in her whole appearance. Her skirts of
old, but rich, black fabric swept about her long, advancing limbs;
she held her black-bonneted head high, as if crowned. She pushed the
cumbersome baby-carriage with no apparent effort. An ancient India shawl
was draped about her sloping shoulders.

Eudora, as she passed the Glynn house, turned her face slightly, so that
its pure oval was evident. She was now a beauty in late middle life. Her
hair, of an indeterminate shade, swept in soft shadows over her ears;
her features were regular; her expression was at once regal and gentle.
A charm which was neither of youth nor of age reigned in her face;
her grace had surmounted with triumphant ease the slope of every year.
Eudora passed out of sight with the baby-carriage, lifting her proud
lady-head under the soft droop of the spring boughs; and her inspectors,
whom she had not seen, moved back from the Glynn windows with
exclamations of astonishment.

"I wonder," said Abby, "whether she will have that baby call her ma or
aunty."

Meantime Eudora passed down the village street until she reached the
Lancaster house, about half a mile away on the same side. There dwelt
the Misses Amelia and Anna Lancaster, who were about Eudora's age, and
a widowed sister, Mrs. Sophia Willing, who was much older. The Lancaster
house was also a colonial mansion, much after the fashion of Eudora's,
but it showed signs of continued opulence. Eudora's, behind her trees
and leafing vines, was gray for lack of paint. Some of the colonial
ornamental details about porches and roof were sloughing off or had
already disappeared. The Lancaster house gleamed behind its grove of
evergreen trees as white and perfect as in its youth. The windows showed
rich slants of draperies behind their green glister of old glass.

A gardener, with a boy assistant, was at work in the grounds when Eudora
entered. He touched his cap. He was an old man who had lived with the
Lancasters ever since Eudora could remember. He advanced toward her now.
"Sha'n't Tommy push--the baby-carriage up to the house for you, Miss
Eudora?" he said, in his cracked old voice.

Eudora flushed slightly, and, as if in response, the old man flushed,
also. "No, I thank you, Wilson," she said, and moved on.

The boy, who was raking dry leaves, stood gazing at them with a shrewd,
whimsical expression. He was the old man's grandson.

"Is that a boy or a girl kid, grandpa?" he inquired, when the gardener
returned.

"Hold your tongue!" replied the old man, irascibly. Suddenly he seized
the boy by his two thin little shoulders with knotted old hands.

"Look at here, Tommy, whatever you know, you keep your mouth shet, and
whatever you don't know, you keep your mouth shet, if you know what's
good for you," he said, in a fierce whisper.

The boy whistled and shrugged his shoulders loose. "You know I ain't
goin' to tell tales, grandpa," he said, in a curiously manly fashion.

The old man nodded. "All right, Tommy. I don't believe you be, nuther,
but you may jest as well git it through your head what's goin' to happen
if you do."

"Ain't goin' to," returned the boy. He whistled charmingly as he raked
the leaves. His whistle sounded like the carol of a bird.

Eudora pushed the carriage around to the side door, and immediately
there was a fluttering rush of a slender woman clad in lavender down the
steps. This woman first kissed Eudora with gentle fervor, then, with a
sly look around and voice raised intentionally high, she lifted the
blue and white roll from the carriage with the tenderest care. "Did the
darling come to see his aunties?" she shrilled.

The old man and the boy in the front yard heard her distinctly. The old
man's face was imperturbable. The boy grinned.

Two other women, all clad in lavender, appeared in the doorway. They
also bent over the blue and white bundle. They also said something about
the darling coming to see his aunties. Then there ensued the softest
chorus of lady-laughter, as if at some hidden joke.

"Come in, Eudora dear," said Amelia Lancaster. "Yes, come in, Eudora
dear," said Anna Lancaster. "Yes, come in, Eudora dear," said Sophia
Willing.

Sophia looked much older than her sisters, but with that exception the
resemblance between all three was startling. They always dressed exactly
alike, too, in silken fabric of bluish lavender, like myrtle blossoms.
Some of the poetical souls in the village called the Lancaster sisters
"The ladies in lavender."

There was an astonishing change in the treatment of the blue and white
bundle when the sisters and Eudora were in the stately old sitting-room,
with its heavy mahogany furniture and its white-wainscoted calls. Amelia
simply tossed the bundle into a corner of the sofa; then the sisters all
sat in a loving circle around Eudora.

"Are you sure you are not utterly worn out, dear?" asked Amelia,
tenderly; and the others repeated the question in exactly the same tone.
The Lancaster sisters were not pretty, but all had charming expressions
of gentleness and a dignified good-will and loving kindness. Their blue
eyes beamed love at Eudora, and it was as if she sat encircled in a
soul-ring of affection.

She responded, and her beautiful face glowed with tenderness and
pleasure, and something besides, which was as the light of victory.

"I am not in the least tired, thank you, dears," she replied. "Why
should I be tired? I am very strong."

Amelia murmured something about such hard work.

"I never thought it would be hard work taking care of a baby," replied
Eudora, "and especially such a very light baby."

Something whimsical crept into Eudora's voice; something whimsical crept
into the love-light of the other women's eyes. Again a soft ripple of
mirth swept over them.

"Especially a baby who never cries," said Amelia.

"No, he never does cry," said Eudora, demurely.

They laughed again. Then Amelia rose and left the room to get the
tea-things. The old serving-woman who had lived with them for many years
was suffering from rheumatism, and was cared for by her daughter in the
little cottage across the road from the Lancaster house. Her husband and
grandson were the man and boy at work in the grounds. The three sisters
took care of themselves and their house with the elegant ease and lack
of fluster of gentlewomen born and bred. Miss Amelia, bringing in
the tea-tray, was an unclassed being, neither maid nor mistress, but
outranking either. She had tied on a white apron. She bore the
silver tray with an ease which bespoke either nerve or muscle in her
lace-draped arms.

She poured the tea, holding the silver pot high and letting the amber
fluid trickle slowly, and the pearls and diamonds on her thin hands
shone dully. Sophia passed little china plates and fringed napkins, and
Anna a silver basket with golden squares of sponge-cake.

The ladies ate and drank, and the blue and white bundle on the sofa
remained motionless. Eudora, after she had finished her tea, leaned
back gracefully in her chair, and her dark eyes gleamed with its mild
stimulus. She remained an hour or more. When she went out, Amelia
slipped an envelope into her hand and at the same time embraced and
kissed her. Sophia and Anna followed her example. Eudora opened her
mouth as if to speak, but smiled instead, a fond, proud smile. During
the last fifteen minutes of her stay Amelia had slipped out of the
room with the blue and white bundle. Now she brought it out and laid it
carefully in the carriage.

"We are always so glad to see you, dearest Eudora," said she, "but you
understand--"

"Yes," said Sophia, "you understand, Eudora dear, that there is not the
slightest haste."

Eudora nodded, and her long neck seemed to grow longer.

When she was stepping regally down the path, Amelia said in a hasty
whisper to Sophia: "Did you tell her?"

Sophia shook her head. "No, sister."

"I didn't know but you might have, while I was out of the room."

"I did not," said Sophia. She looked doubtfully at Amelia, then at Anna,
and doubt flashed back and forth between the three pairs of blue eyes
for a second. Then Sophia spoke with authority, because she was the
only one of them all who had entered the estate of matrimony, and had
consequently obvious cognizance of such matters.

"I think," said she, "that Eudora should be told that Harry Lawton has
come back and is boarding at the Wellwood Inn."

"You think," faltered Amelia, "that it is possible she might meet him
unexpectedly?"

"I certainly do think so. And she might show her feelings in a way which
she would ever afterward regret."

"You think, then, that she--"

Sophia gave her sister a look. Amelia fled after Eudora and the
baby-carriage. She overtook her at the gate. She laid her hand on
Eudora's arm, draped with India shawl.

"Eudora!" she gasped.

Eudora turned her serene face and regarded her questioningly.

"Eudora," said Amelia, "have you heard of anybody's coming to stay at
the inn lately?"

"No," replied Eudora, calmly. "Why, dear?"

"Nothing, only, Eudora, a dear and old friend of yours, of ours, is
there, so I hear."

Eudora did not inquire who the old friend might be. "Really?" she
remarked. Then she said, "Goodby, Amelia dear," and resumed her progress
with the baby-carriage.




PART II

"She never even asked who it was," Amelia reported to her sisters,
when she had returned to the house. "Because she knew," replied Sophia,
sagely; "there has never been any old friend but that one old friend to
come back into Eudora Yates's life."

"Has he come back into her life, I wonder?" said Amelia.

"What did he return to Wellwood for if he didn't come for that? All
his relatives are gone. He never married. Yes, he has come back to see
Eudora and marry her, if she will have him. No man who ever loved Eudora
would ever get over loving her. And he will not be shocked when he sees
her. She is no more changed than a beautiful old statue."

"HE is changed, though," said Amelia. "I saw him the other day. He
didn't see me, and I would hardly have known him. He has grown stout,
and his hair is gray."

"Eudora's hair is gray," said Sophia.

"Yes, but you can see the gold through Eudora's gray. It just looks as
if a shadow was thrown over it. It doesn't change her. Harry Lawton's
gray hair does change him."

"If," said Anna, sentimentally, "Eudora thinks Harry's hair turned gray
for love of her, you can trust her or any woman to see the gold through
it."

"Harry's hair was never gold--just an ordinary brown," said Amelia.
"Anyway, the Lawtons turned gray young."

"She won't think of that at all," said Sophia.

"I wonder why Eudora always avoided him so, years ago," said Amelia.

"Why doesn't a girl in a field of daisies stop to pick one, which she
never forgets?" said Sophia. "Eudora had so many chances, and I don't
think her heart was fixed when she was very young; at least, I don't
think it was fixed so she knew it."

"I wonder," said Amelia, "if he will go and call on her."

Amelia privately wished that she lived near enough to know if Harry
Lawton did call. She, as well as Mrs. Joseph Glynn, would have enjoyed
watching out and knowing something of the village happenings, but the
Lancaster house was situated so far from the road, behind its grove of
trees, that nothing whatever could be seen.

"I doubt if Eudora tells, if he does call--that is, not unless something
definite happens," said Anna.

"No," remarked Amelia, sadly. "Eudora is a dear, but she is very silent
with regard to her own affairs."

"She ought to be," said Sophia, with her married authority. She was, to
her sisters, as one who had passed within the shrine and was dignifiedly
silent with regard to its intimate mysteries.

"I suppose so," assented Anna, with a soft sigh. Amelia sighed also.
Then she took the tea-tray out of the room. She had to make some
biscuits for supper.

Meantime Eudora was pacing homeward with the baby-carriage. Her serene
face was a little perturbed. Her oval cheeks were flushed, and her mouth
now and then trembled. She had, if she followed her usual course, to
pass the Wellwood Inn, but she could diverge, and by taking a side
street and walking a half-mile farther reach home without coming in
sight of the inn. She did so to-day.

When she reached the side street she turned rather swiftly and gave a
little sigh of relief. She was afraid that she might meet Harry Lawton.
It was a lonely way. There was a brook on one side, bordered thickly
with bushy willows which were turning gold-green. On the other side
were undulating pasture-lands on which grazed a few sheep. There were
no houses until she reached the turn which would lead back to the main
street, on which her home was located.

Eudora was about midway of this street when she saw a man approaching.
He was a large man clad in gray, and he was swinging an umbrella.
Somehow the swing of that umbrella, even from a distance, gave an
impression of embarrassment and boyish hesitation. Eudora did not know
him at first. She had expected to see the same Harry Lawton who had gone
away. She did not expect to see a stout, middle-aged man, but a slim
youth.

However, as they drew nearer each other, she knew; and curiously enough
it was that swing of the tightly furled umbrella which gave her the
clue. She knew Harry because of that. It was a little boyish trick which
had survived time. It was too late for her to draw back, for he had seen
her, and Eudora was keenly alive to the indignity of abruptly turning
and scuttling away with the tail of her black silk swishing, her India
shawl trailing, and the baby-carriage bumping over the furrows. She
continued, and Harry Lawton continued, and they met.

Harry Lawton had known Eudora at once. She looked the same to him as
when she had been a girl, and he looked the same to her when he spoke.

"Hullo, Eudora," said Harry Lawton, in a ludicrously boyish fashion. His
face flushed, too, like a boy. He extended his hand like a boy. The man,
seen near at hand, was a boy. In reality he himself had not changed. A
few layers of flesh and a change of color-cells do not make another man.
He had always been a simple, sincere, friendly soul, beloved of men and
women alike, and he was that now. Eudora held out her hand, and her eyes
fell before the eyes of the man, in an absurd fashion for such a stately
creature as she. But the man himself acted like a great happy overgrown
school-boy.

"Hullo, Eudora," he said again.

"Hullo," said she, falteringly.

It was inconceivable that they should meet in such wise after the years
of separation and longing which they had both undergone; but each took
refuge, as it were, in a long-past youth, even childhood, from the
fierce tension of age. When they were both children they had been
accustomed to pass each other on the village street with exactly such
salutation, and now both reverted to it. The tall, regal woman in her
India shawl and the stout, middle-aged man had both stepped back to
their vantage-ground of springtime to meet.

However, after a moment, Eudora reasserted herself. "I only heard a
short time ago that you were here," she said, in her usual even voice.
The fair oval of her face was as serene and proud toward the man as the
face of the moon.

The man swung his umbrella, then began prodding the ground with it.
"Hullo, Eudora," he said again; then he added: "How are you, anyway?
Fine and well?"

"I am very well, thank you," said Eudora. "So you have come home to
Wellwood after all this time?"

The man made an effort and recovered himself, although his handsome face
was burning.

"Yes," he remarked, with considerable ease and dignity, to which he
had a right, for Harry Lawton had not made a failure of his life, even
though it had not included Eudora and a fulfilled dream.

"Yes," he continued, "I had some leisure; in fact, I have this spring
retired from business; and I thought I would have a look at the old
place. Very little changed I am happy to find it."

"Yes, it is very little changed," assented Eudora; "at least, it seems
so to me, but it is not for a life-long dweller in any place to judge of
change. It is for the one who goes and returns after many years."

There was a faint hint of proud sadness in Eudora's voice as she spoke
the last two words.

"It has been many years," said Lawton, gravely, "and I wonder if it has
seemed so to you."

Eudora held her head proudly. "Time passes swiftly," said she, tritely.

"But sometimes it may seem long in the passing, however swift," said
Lawton, "though I suppose it has not to you. You look just the same," he
added, regarding her admiringly.

Eudora flushed a little. "I must be changed," she murmured.

"Not a bit. I would have known you anywhere. But I--"

"I knew you the minute you spoke."

"Did you?" he asked, eagerly. "I was afraid I had grown so stout you
would not remember me at all. Queer how a man will grow stout. I am not
such a big eater, either, and I have worked hard, and--well, I might
have been worse off, but I must say I have seen men who seemed to me
happier, though I have made the best of things. I always did despise a
flunk. But you! I heard you had adopted a baby," he said, with a sudden
glance at the blue and white bundle in the carriage, "and I thought
you were mighty sensible. When people grow old they want young people
growing around them, staffs for old age, you know, and all that sort of
thing. Don't know but I should have adopted a boy myself if it hadn't
been for--"

The man stopped, and his face was pink. Eudora turned her face slightly
away.

"By the way," said the man, in a suddenly hushed voice, "I suppose the
kid you've got there is asleep. Wouldn't do to wake him?"

"I think I had better not," replied Eudora, in a hesitating voice. She
began to walk along, and Harry Lawton fell into step beside her.

"I suppose it isn't best to wake up babies; makes them cross, and they
cry," he said. "Say, Eudora, is he much trouble?"

"Very little," replied Eudora, still in that strange voice.

"Doesn't keep you awake nights?"

"Oh no."

"Because if he does, I really think you should have a nurse. I don't
think you ought to lose sleep taking care of him."

"I do not."

"Well, I was mighty glad when I heard you had adopted him. I suppose
you made sure about his parentage, where he hailed from and what sort of
people?"

"Oh yes." Eudora was very pale.

"That's right. Maybe some time you will tell me all about it. I am
coming over Thursday to have a look at the youngster. I have to go to
the city on business to-morrow and can't get back until Thursday. I was
coming over to-night to call on you, but I have a man coming to the inn
this evening--he called me up on the telephone just now--one of the men
who have taken my place in the business; and as long as I have met you
I will just walk along with you, and come Thursday. I suppose the baby
won't be likely to wake up just yet, and when he does you'll have to get
his supper and put him to bed. Is that the way the rule goes?"

Eudora nodded in a shamed, speechless sort of way.

"All right. I'll come Thursday--but say, look here, Eudora. This is a
quiet road, not a soul in sight, just like an outdoor room to ourselves.
Why shouldn't I know now just as well as wait? Say, Eudora, you know how
I used to feel about you. Well, it has lasted all these years. There has
never been another woman I even cared to look at. You are alone, except
for that baby, and I am alone. Eudora--"

The man hesitated. His flushed face had paled. Eudora paced silently and
waveringly at his side.

"Eudora," the man went on, "you know you always used to run away from
me--never gave me a chance to really ask; and I thought you didn't care.
But somehow I have wondered--perhaps because you never got married--if
you didn't quite mean it, if you didn't quite know your own mind. You'll
think I'm a conceited ass, but I'm not a bad sort, Eudora. I would be
as good to you as I know how, and--we could bring him up together." He
pointed to the carriage. "I have plenty of money. We could do anything
we wanted to do for him, and we should not have to live alone. Say,
Eudora, you may not think it's the thing for a man to own up to, but,
hang it all! I'm alone, and I don't want to face the rest of my life
alone. Eudora, do you think you could make up your mind to marry me,
after all?"

They had reached the turn in the road. Just beyond rose the stately pile
of the old Yates mansion. Eudora stood still and gave one desperate look
at her lover. "I will let you know Thursday," she gasped. Then she was
gone, trundling the baby-carriage with incredible speed.

"But, Eudora--"

"I must go," she called back, faintly. The man stood staring after the
hurrying figure with its swishing black skirts and its flying points of
rich India shawl, and he smiled happily and tenderly. That evening
at the inn his caller, a young fellow just married and beaming with
happiness, saw an answering beam in the older man's face. He broke off
in the midst of a sentence and stared at him.

"Don't give me away until I tell you to, Ned," he said, "but I don't
know but I am going to follow your example."

"My example?"

"Yes, going to get married."

The young man gasped. A look of surprise, of amusement, then of generous
sympathy came over his face. He grasped Lawton's hand.

"Who is she?"

"Oh, a woman I wanted more than anything in the world when I was about
your age."

"Then she isn't young?"

"She is better than young."

"Well," agreed the young man, "being young and pretty is not
everything."

"Pretty!" said Harry Lawton, scornfully, "pretty! She is a great
beauty."

"And not young?"

"She is a great beauty, and better than young, because time has not
touched her beauty, and you can see for yourself that it lasts."

The young man laughed. "Oh, well," he said, with a tender inflection, "I
dare say that my Amy will look like that to me."

"If she doesn't you don't love her," said Lawton. "But my Eudora IS
that."

"That is a queer-sounding Greek name."

"She is Greek, like her name. Such beauty never grows old. She stands on
her pedestal, and time only looks at her to love her."

"I thought you were a business man as hard as nails," said the young
man, wonderingly. Lawton laughed.

When Thursday came, Lawton, carefully dressed and carrying a long
tissue-paper package, evidently of roses, approached the Yates house. It
was late in the afternoon. There had been a warm day, and the trees were
clouds of green and more bushes had blossomed. Eudora had put on a
green silk dress of her youth. The revolving fashions had made it very
passable, and the fabric was as beautiful as ever.

When Lawton presented her with the roses she pinned one in the yellowed
lace which draped her bodice and put the rest in a great china vase on
the table. The roses were very fragrant, and immediately the whole room
was possessed by them.

A tiny, insistent cry came from a corner, and Lawton and Eudora turned
toward it. There stood the old wooden cradle in which Eudora had been
rocked to sleep, but over the clumsy hood Eudora had tacked a fall of
rich old lace and a great bow of soft pink satin.

"He is waking up," said the man, in a hushed, almost reverent voice.

Eudora nodded. She went toward the cradle, and the man followed. She
lifted the curtain of lace, and there became visible little feebly
waving pink arms and hands, like tentacles of love, and a little
puckered pink face which was at once ugly and divinely beautiful.

"A fine boy," said the man. The baby made a grimace at him which was
hideous but lovely.

"I do believe he thinks he knows you," said Eudora, foolishly.

The baby made a little nestling motion, and its creasy eyelids dropped.

"Looks to me as if he was going to sleep again," said Lawton, in a
whisper. Eudora jogged the cradle gently with her foot, and both were
still. Then Eudora dropped the lace veil over the cradle again and moved
softly away.

Lawton followed her. "I haven't my answer yet, Eudora," he whispered,
leaning over her shoulder as she moved.

"Come into the other room," she murmured, "or we shall wake the baby."
Her voice was softly excited.

Eudora led the way into the parlor, upon whose walls hung some really
good portraits and whose furnishings still merited the adjective
magnificent. There had been opulence in the Yates family; and in this
room, which had been conserved, there was still undimmed and unfaded
evidence of it. Eudora drew aside a brocade curtain and sat down on an
embroidered satin sofa. Lawton sat beside her.

"This room looks every whit as grand as it used to look to me when I was
a boy," he said.

"It has hardly been opened, except to have it cleaned, since you went
away," replied Eudora, "and no wear has come upon it."

"And everything was rather splendid to begin with, and has lasted. And
so were you, Eudora, and you have lasted. Well, what about my answer,
dear girl?"

"You have to hear something first."

Lawton laughed. "A confession?"

Eudora held her head proudly. "No, not exactly," said she. "I am not
sure that I have ever had anything to confess."

"You never were sure, you proud creature."

"I am not now. I never intended to deceive you, but you were deceived. I
did intend to deceive others, others who had no right to know. I do not
feel that I owe them any explanation. I do owe you one, although I do
not feel that I have done anything wrong. Still, I cannot allow you to
remain deceived."

"Well, what is it, dear?"

Eudora looked at him. "You remember that afternoon when you met me with
the baby-carriage?"

"Well, I should think so. My memory has not failed me in three days."

"You thought I had a baby in that carriage."

"Of course I did."

"There wasn't a baby in the carriage."

"Well, what on earth was it, then? A cat?"

Eudora, if possible, looked prouder. "It was a package of soiled linen
from the Lancaster girls."

"Oh, good heavens, Eudora!"

"Yes," said Eudora, proudly. "I lost nearly everything when that
railroad failed. I had enough left to pay the taxes, and that was all.
After I had used a small sum in the savings-bank there was nothing. One
day I went over to the Lancasters', and I--well, I had not had much to
eat for several days. I was a little faint, and--"

"Eudora, you poor, darling girl!"

"And the Lancaster girls found out," continued Eudora, calmly. "They
gave me something to eat, and I suppose I ate as if I were famished. I
was."

"Eudora!"

"And they wanted to give me money, but I would not take it, and they
had been trying to find a laundress for their finer linen--their old
serving-woman was ill. They could find one for the heavier things, but
they are very particular, and I was sure I could manage, and so I begged
them to let me have the work, and they did, and overpaid me, I fear. And
I--I knew very well how many spying eyes were about, and I thought of
my proud father and my proud mother and grandmother, and perhaps I was
proud, too. You know they talk about the Yates pride. It was not so much
because I was ashamed of doing honest work as because I did resent those
prying eyes and tattling tongues, and so I said nothing, but I did go
back and forth in broad daylight with the linen wrapped up in the old
blue and white blanket, in my old carriage, and they thought what they
thought."

Eudora laughed faintly. She had a gentle humor. "It was somewhat
laughable, too," she observed. "The Lancaster girls and I have had our
little jests over it, but I felt that I could not deceive you."

Lawton looked bewildered. "But that is a real baby in there," he said,
jerking an elbow toward the other room.

"Oh yes," replied Eudora. "I adopted him yesterday. I went to the
Children's Home in Elmfield. Amelia Lancaster went with me. Wilson
drove us over. I know a nurse there. She took care of mother in her last
illness. And I adopted this baby; at least, I am going to. He comes of
respectable people, and his parents are dead. His mother died when he
was born. He is healthy, and I thought him a beautiful baby."

"Yes, he is," assented Lawton, but he still looked somewhat perplexed.
"But why did you hurry off so and get him, Eudora?" said he.

"I thought from what you said that day that you would be disappointed
when you found out I had only the Lancaster linen and not a real baby,"
said Eudora with her calm, grand air and with no trace of a smile.

"Then that means that you say yes, Eudora?"

For the first time Eudora gave a startled glance at him. "Didn't you
know?" she gasped.

"How should I? You had not said yes really, dear."

"Do you think," said Eudora Yates, "that I am not too proud to allow you
to ask me if my answer were not yes?"

"So that is the reason you always ran away from me, years ago, so that I
never had a chance to ask you?"

"Of course," said Eudora. "No woman of my family ever allows a
declaration which she does not intend to accept. I was always taught
that by my mother."

Then a small but insistent cry rent the air. "The baby is awake!" cried
Eudora, and ran, or, rather, paced swiftly--Eudora had been taught never
to run--and Lawton followed. It was he who finally quieted the child,
holding the little thing in his arms.

But the baby, before that, cried so long and lustily that all the women
in the Glynn house opposite were on the alert, and also some of the
friends who were calling there. Abby Simson was one.

"Harry Lawton has been there over an hour now," said Abby, while the
wailing continued, "and I know as well as I want to that there will be a
wedding."

"I wonder he doesn't object to that adopted baby," said Julia
Esterbrook.

"I know one thing," said Abby Simson. "It must be a boy baby, it hollers
so."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Yates Pride, by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YATES PRIDE ***

***** This file should be named 978.txt or 978.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/978/

Produced by Judith Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
